












Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/ayearofdisobedience 


A YEAR OF 
DISOBEDIENCE 

AND A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


A PhotoDocumentary of the Demonstrations, 

Civil Disobedience, Arrests and Trials of Thousands of People against 
the Rocky Flats Nuclear Weapons Plant 



Produced and Photographed by Joseph Daniel 


Original Preface, Trial Transcripts, and New Afterword by Daniel Ellsberg 


Original Reporting by Keith Pope 


Original Poetry and “Plutonian Ode” by Allen Ginsberg 


New Updated History and Reflection by LeRoy Moore 


Activists Appendix by August Freirich 








w 

StoryArtsMedia 


A Year of Disobedience 
And a Criticality of Conscience 
Copyright © 2013 Joseph Daniel 
All rights reserved. 

No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form 
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, 
recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, with¬ 
out written permission from the publisher. 

Published by Story Arts Media 
PO Box 1230, Boulder, CO 80306 
www.storyartsmedia.com 

ISBN: 978-0-9889754-4-6 (paperback) 

Library of Congress Control Number: 2013941898 
www.ayearofdisobedience.com 


Plutonian Ode reprinted by original permission of Allen Ginsberg 
All photographs are by Joseph Daniel (unless credited otherwise) 
Cover and Interior Design by Joseph Daniel 


Crit*i*cal*i*ty 

1. The quality, state, or degree of being of the highest importance 

2. The point at which a nuclear reaction is self-sustaining 


Waiting room at the Plutonium fabrication facility 
“Give us the weapons we need to protect ourselves.” 

The bareheaded guard lifts a flyswatter above his desk 

— whap! 

Green letter’d shield on the pressboard wall: 

“Life is fragile. Handle with care” — 

My Goodness! here’s where they make the nuclear bomb triggers. 


-Allen Ginsberg 


A NOTE TO READERS 


A Year of Disobedience was first published in 1979 by the Daniel Publishing Group. What you are 
holding is the 2013 revised edition in a re-designed format, published by Story Arts Media (same 
folks, new company name). The new subtitle - And a Criticality of Conscience - has been added 
to reflect additional, updated material included in the book. 

Referring to the Table of Contents (opposite), Part I through Part III features all of the original text 
and photographs from the 1979 edition, completely unchanged except for design. It should be read 
in that context, although the timelessness of the material is startling. Part IV features a current, up¬ 
dated history and a personal reflection by Professor LeRoy Moore, and a brand new Afterword in 
the form of May/June 2013 interviews between author Joseph Daniel and activist Daniel Ellsberg. 
Part IV also features an Activists Appendix compiled by August Freirich. 

Photos of the authors in Part I through Part III are of them in 1978, photos of the activists in the 
Appendix are of them today. An enhanced version of A Year of Disobedience And a Criticality of 
Conscience is also available in ebook formats through iTunes, Amazon, and Nook, which (depend¬ 
ing on format) include embedded video by Joseph Daniel, original music by Elena Klaver, 
and a 1979 Plutonian Ode reading by Allen Ginsberg. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


6 About the Photographs - by Joseph Daniel 

PART I - A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 

8 Original Preface - by Daniel Ellsberg 
14 Original Introduction & Chapters - By Keith Pope 
19 Chapter One 
23 Chapter Two 
38 Chapter Three 

44 Plutonian Ode - By Allen Ginsberg 

PART II - THE TRIAL 

54 Chapter Four 

59 Original Testimony - By Daniel Ellsberg 
82 Chapter Five 

PART III - BACK TO ROCKY FLATS 

86 Chapter Six 
89 Chapter Seven 
103 Original Epilogue 

PART IV - A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 

106 Local Hazard Global Threat - By LeRoy Moore 
136 Afterword - By Daniel Ellsberg & Joseph Daniel 
156 Activists Appendix - By August Freirich 

168 The Author 

169 Acknowledgement 


170 


If Youe Were Inspired Reading This Book 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


BY JOSEPH DANIEL 




PHOTOGRAPHS 

T hirty-five years ago, in the spring of 1978, 
all of this happened. I was a 23-year-old 
dropout from journalism school trying to make 
it as a professional photographer. 

I worked for the Colorado Daily at the time, 
which had been the student newspaper for the 
University of Colorado, my elusive alma mater. 
A couple of years earlier, determined to detach 
ourselves from the purse strings and perceived 
administrative control of the university, we had 
taken the paper off-campus and reorganized 
it as a privately-held, independent publication 
serving the needs of both CU students and the 
Boulder community at large. 

It was an ambitious experiment, immediate¬ 
ly challenging financially, but exceedingly rich 
in journalistic fervor. All we needed to compete 
with the “big” papers were good stories. Little 


did we know that events at Rocky Flats - right 
there in our own backyard - would soon become 
international headlines of critical importance. 

Over the next twelve months I spent a great 
deal of time on assignment at Rocky Flats cov¬ 
ering the demonstrations, civil disobedience, ar¬ 
rests and trials of thousands of people determined 
to expose the danger and end the production of 
plutonium triggers used in nuclear warheads. 

At the end of that year I had amassed my first 
comprehensive photo essay on a subject of real 
consequence, and I decided to publish the work 
in a small 9” X 9” soft cover book entitled A 
Year of Disobedience. The printing was inconsis¬ 
tent, the design was pretty - pretty damn hard to 
read - and the cost was so prohibitive we could 
only produce a couple of thousand copies. 

But the story was incredible. And somehow 
I managed to convince Daniel Ellsberg (of re¬ 
cent Pentagon Papers fame) to write a preface 
and comment on testimony from the trial, and 
poet Allen Ginsberg to contribute original work 
including the first ever printing of his now re¬ 
nowned poem Plutonian Ode. 

The book sold out almost immediately, main¬ 
ly to people who “had been there.” Then, that 
was that. It disappeared into the ether of what 
had been, and I moved on to other stories. I got 
married, raised a family, built a career, and rarely 
thought of Rocky Flats. The plant was shut 
down, the cold war ended, and somehow the 
threat of nuclear weapons passed with the years. 

Until... I woke up one recent morning to news 
about how madmen - in North Korea, Iran, and 
secret terrorists enclaves - might now have such 
a bomb and the impetus to use it. 

The realization shocked me awake, and I 
knew it was time to revisit that defining “year 
of disobedience” at Rocky Flats. Join me. 


6 



A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


PART I 

A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


BY DANIEL ELLSBERG 



PREFACE 

hy sit on the tracks at Rocky Flats? 
Because as long as you sit there, no train 
will go through to the plant, or come out 
with radioactive waste. Without shipping that 
waste away from the workers, within ten days 
to several weeks production at the Rocky Flats 
Nuclear Weapons Plant would have to cease. 
Without the product of that single plant—the 
only facility that machines plutonium compo¬ 
nents for all U.S. fission weapons and ther¬ 
monuclear fusion weapons—no new nuclear 
weapons could be added to the U.S. stockpile. 
Because of “normal” radioactive decay of the 
plutonium components, each of the 30,000 
U.S. warheads deployed around the world 
must be periodically returned for recycling at 
this one plant in Colorado. And if you sit there 
long enough to stop the lathes that shape the 


radioactive, poisonous, explosive metal, the 
U.S. inventory of operational weapons begins 
inexorably to dwindle. 

A very strategic location, that little railroad 
spur, a true seat of power. By just sitting—no 
threats to anyone, no violence to property or 
people, no “action” at all—occupying, long 
enough, 18 inches of iron rail in Jefferson 
County, Colorado—you stop the arms race, 
and reverse it. 

“But you don’t, really, stop production,” 
it will be pointed out by journalists, prosecu¬ 
tors, judges, other citizens. “The train will al¬ 
ways get through.” To which the answer is, 
“Not without arrests.” Not invisibly, anymore; 
not smoothly, on time, without effort or reflec¬ 
tion from within the bureaucratic system; not 
without public question, comment, controver¬ 
sy, challenge. Not, anymore, with the presumed 
consent of all American citizens. 

Sand will have entered the machinery. 
And more than that: I believe that the pro¬ 
cess within American society, over more than 
30 years, of building up a stockpile of over 
30,000 weapons—22,000 “tactical” weap¬ 
ons that average the explosive yield of the 
Fiiroshima and Nagasaki weapons and 9,000 
“strategic” warheads that range from several 
times to a thousand times as powerful—has 


Daniel Ellsberg purchased stock in Rockwell 
Corporation in order to attend stockholder 
meetings and voice his opinion about their role 
at Rocky Flats. He would later burn his first divi¬ 
dend check to the delight of the crowd at one 
of many demonstrations at the nuclear weapons 
facility. Ellsberg was already a seasoned activist 
when he joined the efforts against Rocky Flats 
and he brought with him a powerful celebrity 
and a well-honed skill in "protest PR." 



8 




A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 



9 








A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


depended crucially at every point on that un¬ 
broken invisibility, on public ignorance and 
inattention, on the absence of questioning 
and the supposed consensus the policy has 
enjoyed. To remove that protective cloak is 
to act more than “symbolically.” Within the 
context of a democratic system, which can 
then begin to function with public awareness 
and full information, it is to exercise, legiti¬ 
mately, real power. 

The Department of Energy would very 
much prefer to conduct business as usual 
in the nuclear weapons complex it manag¬ 
es, quietly designing and producing nuclear 
weapons without having to arrest Americans 
to do it. But for eight months in 1978, from 
April 29 to the last day of the year, it did not 
have that option. 

From the beginning, the DOE and the 
Rockwell Corporation hoped that the occu¬ 
piers would just go away; and after a first 
night of icy rain was followed by sleet, hail, 
and several feet of snow, that seemed a pretty 
good bet. While waiting, the Rockwell pub¬ 
lic relations office blanketed the significance 
of the challenge by telling reporters that the 
occupiers could stay “as long as they liked.” 
We were sitting on an unimportant spur, they 
said, used only once or twice a year, and then 
never for radioactive cargo. But precisely be¬ 
cause of the actual function of those tracks— 
in effect, a critical point in the entire weap¬ 
ons complex—Rockwell had to give up the 
he to its own assurances within less than a 
week. Since we had not gone away, we had 
to be forcibly removed. (Not much force was 
required, since we were determinedly nonvio¬ 
lent, but nothing less than arrest.) 

In their demand for our arrest, Rockwell and 


the DOE used language, which served us from 
then on to explain our intentions to others. The 
occupiers were “obstructing a vital access link,” 
needed for transport of radioactive waste, and 
were interfering with the plant’s “normal op¬ 
erations.” 

That was precisely what we had come there 
to do. From that point on, we knew we were on 
the right track, and we decided to stay there. 

As I said to the court at my first arraignment, 
no bond was necessary to assure my presence (for 
trial) in Colorado; I was working in the state. 

“Occupation?” 

“Obstructing the normal operations of the 
Rocky Flats nuclear weapons production facility.” 

By doing this work over the next year—an¬ 
nouncing an intention to blockade this partic¬ 
ular stretch of track, not just for a day or for 
any fixed period, but indefinitely (unless arrest¬ 
ed and removed) until the plant was convert¬ 
ed to peaceful purposes—hundreds of people 
conveyed a simple message quite unmistak¬ 
ably: They were Americans who believed very 
strongly that “30,000 warheads are enough.” 

Moreover, the message of these bodies on the 
tracks has a special power, of a kind demon¬ 
strated again and again: in the movement 
against atmospheric nuclear testing, in the 
civil rights movement, in the struggle against 
the Vietnam war. It is the power to raise cer¬ 
tain questions in the hearts of onlookers more 
forcefully than words alone could do, uttered 
from a different location: in this case, the ques¬ 
tion, “What could I do to interfere with nor¬ 
mal operations at Rocky Flats?” When enough 
people come to ask themselves that question— 
or when Jimmy Carter does, or his successor— 
Rocky Flats will close. 

I have felt that kind of power work on my 


10 


A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


own life, and I am grateful for it; it is a les¬ 
son one wants to pass on. Marchers and let¬ 
ter writers, effective and essential as they were 
(and are), had not suggested to me, in 1969, the 
thought of doing something for which I might 
spend 115 years in prison. Meanwhile, thou- 


at last, I quickly found powers I had been blind 
to until then: the power to tell truths that had 
been lied about for years, backed up with docu¬ 
ments from my own safe that should be shared 
with Congress and the public. 

Why was I sitting at Rocky Flats? 



sands of young Americans of draft age were 
choosing to go to jail—not file CO, or get de¬ 
ferred, or leave the country or accept the draft— 
to awaken other Americans to the truth that the 
war was wrong and that they might have more 
power to confront it than they yet realized, if 
only they were ready to accept some risk. 

Meeting some of these young men face to 
face as they discussed their intentions, calmly, 
or prepared to go inside, led me immediately 
to the crucial question: “What can I do to help 
end this war if I’m willing to lose my job? If I’m 
willing to go to jail?” Asking the right questions 


May 4, 1978: Supporters gather with activists to 
lend encouragement to the Truth Force during 
the first days of civil disobedience. Daniel Ellsberg 
spent the afternoon drafting a speech to be read, 
in the form of a letter "from the tracks" at the up¬ 
coming anniversary of the Kent State shootings. 
He had been invited as a keynote speaker, but 
felt his continued presence on the tracks better 
served the movement as a whole. 


I’ve been invited to explain here what ex¬ 
periences in my own life encouraged me to 
be one of the original members of the Rocky 
Flats Truth Force. It so happens that my 


11 










A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


sworn answers to that are on public record 
in some detail in the District Court files in 
Jefferson County, Colorado, since this was 
essentially the one issue to which I was per¬ 
mitted to testify while on trial for my first 
three arrests for occupying railroad tracks at 
Rocky Flats. 

In brief, it was what I learned in my past oc¬ 
cupation that led to this one. 

In that earlier life, virtually all of the in¬ 
formation that needs telling here, as having 
shaped my present thinking and actions, was 
“classified”—secret from the public, courts 
and Congress (and for significant periods in 
some cases, unknown even to the President)— 
at the time I acquired it in my former profes¬ 
sion of defense analyst. There has never exist¬ 
ed information, in my opinion, that the public 
had a more urgent “need to know.” 

I revealed the Pentagon Papers to the Senate 
ten years ago because I believed that decades of 
secrecy surrounding official decision making in 
Vietnam, by promoting public ignorance and 
passivity, had prolonged a needless and wrong¬ 
ful war and threatened the survival of our de¬ 
mocracy. Over the same generation, I believe 
secrecy about the motives and risks of nuclear 
arms production, about nuclear weapons acci¬ 
dents, war plans and cases of contemplated or 
threatened U.S. initiation of nuclear warfare, has 
in the same way prolonged a worldwide nucle¬ 
ar arms buildup and threatens the survival of all 
life on earth. 


The Rocky Flats Nuclear Weapons Plant in the 
spring of 1978, as photographed from the air 
looking east into a backdrop of Denver smog. 



■ 

■mmm 




mi 


I m 


12 





















A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 





' 

I |h| I I I|fej ■ I■■ j HI HM : 

. ■■ . .777777s- ■ 7 

^w i ct i bW WPi m ii iaiw n riwwi ii nt ' [ Hinf < nra at 

■■■ ■■ ■■■■ ■■ 


■ 

: 

SS MBW 






13 






A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


BY KEITH POPE 



INTRODUCTION 

O ver the wide main street of Golden, 
Colorado, a city of 13,000 separated from 
the creeping fringe of the Denver metropolis by 
a pair of table mountains, hangs a metal arch 
with a fresh coat of brown paint and the yel¬ 
low-lettered inscription, “ Welcome to Golden, 
Where the West Lives.” It is the Jefferson Coun¬ 
ty seat, a community noted, despite its playing 
host to the Department of Energy’s Solar Ener¬ 
gy Research Institute and the mammoth Coors 
brewery, for its small-town atmosphere. 

The Golden postmark extends over much of 
Jefferson County. To the west, it stretches into 
the mountains, well beyond the Gilpin County 
line, and to the east and south it encompasses 
everything up to and into the suburbs of Den¬ 
ver. To the north, along the Front Range of the 
Rockies, it extends 12 miles toward Boulder, 


and just inside that boundary lies another De¬ 
partment of Energy property, the Rocky Flats 
Nuclear Weapons Plant. 

Operated under contract by Rockwell Inter¬ 
national’s Atomics International Division, the 
facility’s prime mission is the manufacture of 
plutonium “trigger” components for the nation’s 
thermonuclear bomb arsenal. Its 3,000 scien¬ 
tists, technicians, engineers and support person¬ 
nel also use uranium, beryllium and stainless 
steels in the manufacture of components. At the 
northernmost quarter of the 6,500-acre plant 
site, located on an arid, stone-strewn plateau 16 
miles northwest of downtown Denver, they con¬ 
duct wind energy experiments, also under De¬ 
partment of Energy auspices. 

During the 1970s, Rocky Flats became an 
important target of the anti-nuclear movement, 
largely because of its proximity to a major pop¬ 
ulation center and its unpleasant role of provid¬ 
ing the essential elements for nuclear destruc¬ 
tion. When the facility began operations early 
in 1952, however, the anti-nuclear movement 
was, as a movement, nonexistent, and the local 
populace to a great extent welcomed the plant. 
As one shoe repairman told a Denver report¬ 
er at the time, “Son, a town as dull as this one 
could stand a few slit atoms.” 

Its entertainment aspect aside, the $45-mil- 
lion Rocky Flats facility, initially operated by 
Dow Chemical, would bring the benefits of its 
healthy payroll to the area, principally to the cit¬ 
ies of Golden and Boulder, whose officials also 


April 29, 1978: It was called the largest anti¬ 
nuclear weapons demonstration in United States 
history. Over 5,000 people gathered at the west 
gate of the Rocky Flats Nuclear Weapons Plant 
drawing national media attention. 


14 







lillll 


iilfi 


: v-D:'- 





welt omrd the prosprt t of finally getting a decent 
road between the two f ront Range communities. 

I'm by the mid 70s, some of those officials 
were singing, a slightly different time. Jefferson 
t anility's health duet tor, I )r. (iarl Johnson, is 
surd tepoits claiming radioactive contamina 
lion oI near by soil ext ret ling safe levels, causing 
an m< tease in < ant et among the local popula 
lion and plant workers. Moulder's city council, 
meanwhile, went on record as supporting an 
eventual phase out of the plant’s nut lenr Iuik 
lion, and a task force appointed in 1974 by 
( ioloratlo (iovernot Richard l.anim and 2nd 
I >e,t i k I ( iongressman l i mothy I,. Wil l h called 
lot t on version ol the facility 1 1 > non nuclear 
ptotlut lion. 

The st let it i f it community was locked m tie 
bate ovet the effects of low level exposure to 
plutonium i.libation, and opinion remained 
.limply divided on the ipieslinns <>1 nuclear 
powet and nut It .u warfare. Yet over the years 
an cmol ton had spread like a slow virus among 
several thousand area residents, demanding 
that pit b I u st i til my be lot used tin these issues, 
and t In Rot ky flats I at ilil y, with its “potent ia I 
loi environmental insult,” as a plant public re 
lat unis blot lime apt ly phi asrd it, was the most 
at t css i hlr symbol ol the coni rove rsy. 

I limdimb ol inoit limn wcilk llm 17 milmt from 
Uoiildm to join llm prolml til Rocky I lulu 






** rj 





A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 



18 






A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


CHAPTER ONE 

T he rider drew his horse to a stop, send¬ 
ing a few small stones rolling and a wisp 
of dust rising. As if examining the fading trail 
of some fugitive desperado, he peered down at 
the barely damp ground; then, straightening 
once again in the saddle, 
he wiped his brow and 
nudged the animal into 
a shuffle. Only the squat 
buildings and jutting 
metallic silver tower in 
the background revealed 
the true nature of the 
scene, far removed from 
the time when solitary 
cowboys were a com¬ 
mon sight on the prairie. 

April 29,1978 started 
off hot, but as the day 
turned to evening, occa¬ 
sional rain showers and 
a chilling wind damp¬ 
ened the spirits of the 
horseman and his com¬ 
panions, about 45 Jef¬ 
ferson County Sheriff’s 
Department and Rock¬ 
well International secu¬ 
rity officers. They had 
grown weary of their 
charge: an estimated 
5,000 sign-carrying an¬ 
ti-nuclear protesters just out of sight beyond 
the railway embankment leading into the plant 
from the south. 

Not that police were needed to control the 


peaceful crowd, a muddled blend of environ¬ 
mentalists, peaceniks and assorted activists, in¬ 
cluding small contingents from 20 other states 
and a 22-member delegation from Japan. The 
spirited assemblage occupied itself during its 
four-hour rally by singing songs, transforming 
lines from old favorites into anti-nuclear slo¬ 
gans—the familiar Vietnam-era cry of “Hell No, 

We Won’t Go” became 
“Hell No, We Won’t 
Glow.” 

They listened to 
speeches and mulled 
about the access road 
leading into Rocky 
Flats from Route 93, 
about 800 yards from 
which stood a half- 
dozen helmeted sher¬ 
iff’s officers, posted 
to keep the protesters 
well away from the 
plant itself. 

As national report¬ 
ers and network cam¬ 
era crews mingled with 
and hovered above 
the protesters, and the 
activists themselves 
ambled through the 
crowd meeting old 
friends or browsing the 
T-shirts, bumper stick¬ 
ers and other anti-nu¬ 
clear wares being of¬ 
fered, Daniel Ellsberg, the celebrated leaker of 
the Pentagon Papers, urged the congregation 
to dedicate itself to a lengthy struggle against 
what he termed nuclear “gas chambers.” Sur- 



The protest attracted an amazing cross-section 
of people from varied backgrounds, professing 
many different religious and political beliefs. 
Opposite: A message from a family that chose 
not to attend the demonstration and risk expos¬ 
ing their children to possible radioactivity. 


19 






sum** 


feting 
















A CRITICALITY 

vivors of Hiroshima warned of the horrors of 
atomic destruction, and calls were issued for 
a national referendum on the nuclear power 
question. 

Earlier in the day, caravans of automobiles and 
buses laden with an anxious cargo had arrived at 
the plant from Denver, where about 1,000 protest 
participants received pep talks from Democratic 
Congresswoman Patricia Schroeder and onetime 
civil rights leader Stokely Carmichael. Groups of 
bicyclists, joggers and walkers, as well as vehicle 
caravans, came south from Boulder, home to the 
University of Colorado’s 20,000 students and 
a politically active populace. Hundreds more 
converged on the site from various points 
east and west. 

It was called the largest anti-nuclear-weapons 
demonstration in U.S. history, and it was seen as 
a major link in the long series of activities direct¬ 
ed against Rocky Flats. 

The earliest demonstration at the plant had 
been staged in 1970 by a group called Citizens 
Concerned About Radiation Pollution. It fol¬ 
lowed by a year the first nuclear gas stimula¬ 
tion explosion on Colorado’s Western Slope. 
CCARP issued warnings that the 40-kiloton 
blast would cause structural damage and ra¬ 
dioactive air, land and water pollution. 


Members of an affinity group share a moment 
of meditation before joining other activists for 
an overnight symbolic blockade of a rail spur 
south of the plant. For some the action would 
continue, not just until the following morning, 
but for nearly a year. Bottom: Carrying signs 
and banners, the group gathered on the tracks 
singing songs and cheering each other on. A 
large crowd still remained from the demonstra¬ 
tion and offered support from the road as the 
protesters began to set up camp for the night. 


OF CONSCIENCE 

The state’s anti-nuclear movement began to 
take on momentum following the 1970 dem¬ 
onstration, with CCARP continuing to orga¬ 
nize demonstrations against the plant. Oth¬ 
er groups, including Environmental Action of 
Colorado, joined in by staging commemora¬ 
tive demonstrations on the anniversaries of the 
bombings of Nagasaki and Hiroshima. Envi¬ 
ronmental Action sponsored the formation of 
a group in 1974 to initiate a statewide referen¬ 
dum prohibiting plans for underground nucle¬ 
ar blasts, which succeeded in November with 
60 percent of the vote. A similar effort by Colo¬ 
radans for Safe Power the following year, plac¬ 
ing the Nuclear Safeguards Amendment on 
the November 1976 ballot, fell to defeat after 
sponsors failed to organize a strong grass-roots 
constituency and opponents invested over 
$600,000 in a media campaign. 

It was also in 1974 that the Rocky Flats Ac¬ 
tion Group was formed as a coalition of con¬ 
cerned citizens and groups, including Environ¬ 
mental Action, the American Friends Service 
Committee, Clergy and Laity Concerned and 
others. This coalition attempted to correct the 
movement’s constituency problem by organiz¬ 
ing community meetings, seminars and work¬ 
shops in the area. It lobbied extensively, assist¬ 
ed and watch dogged the Lamm-Wirth Task 
Force, and sponsored visits from Japanese 
atomic bomb survivors. Additionally, it held 
periodic rallies at Rocky Flats, keeping the is¬ 
sue ever before the public eye. 

By 1978, anti-nuclear activists had devel¬ 
oped the planning of demonstrations into an 
art. Early in the year, “Stop the Bomb” and 
“No Nukes” T-shirts were being hawked in 
the hallways of the student center at the Uni¬ 
versity of Colorado, while ubiquitous posters 


21 



A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


and advertisements in the local media satu¬ 
rated eyes and ears with news of the event 
planned for April, billed as the first such mas¬ 
sive protest against a nuclear weapons plant. 
Over 30 national and local organizations, in¬ 
cluding Boulder County’s Democratic Party, 
had endorsed the protest by late March, call¬ 
ing for closure of the plant, alternative em¬ 
ployment for its workforce and the replace¬ 
ment of nuclear technology and the arms 
race with alternative energy and production 
in the service of human needs. During mid- 
April, nonviolent civil disobedience training 
sessions were staged by professional trainers 
from the Movement for a New Society and 
the American Friends Service Committee, and 
persons planning to participate in a symbol¬ 
ic blockade of the railway leading into the 
plant on the night of April 28 were told of the 
legal implications of such an action. In oth¬ 
er training workshops, protesters were intro¬ 
duced to the concept of affinity groups, small 
squads whose members would offer one an¬ 
other emotional, spiritual and moral support 
during the planned action. 

Fearing outbursts during the blockade by 
undisciplined protesters, organizers of the 
event worked closely with Rockwell securi¬ 
ty and the county sheriff’s department during 
April to iron out any problems and prepare 
for unexpected occurrences. It was also during 
April that the Boulder City Council adopted 
its stance favoring conversion of Rocky Flats 
after hearing testimony from an officer of the 
Colorado Department of Health, who said the 
plant’s location constituted a serious hazard to 
the local population. 

Various activists, including Daniel Ellsberg 
and consumer advocate Ralph Nader, made ap¬ 


pearances on the university campus during the 
spring. If they did not devote entire speeches 
to the Rocky Flats topic, at least they seldom 
failed to release a few disdainful remarks. 
Nader, in the course of a harangue directed 
at automobile manufacturers, called the plant 
“an environmental menace.” It was evident by 
the fact that people like Nader knew of plans 
for the protest that it was not an isolated ac¬ 
tion being staged by a small group out of the 
American mainstream. Some perceived it as 
such, however, including the Colorado Coali¬ 
tion for Science and Industry, whose member¬ 
ship included Congressman Wayne Aspinall 
and former Colorado Governor John Vander- 
hoof. Apsinall called the protesters “hysteri¬ 
cal,” but his comment probably served best to 
spread the word about the protest. 

Seen in the context of previous smaller dem¬ 
onstrations and all the organization and prepa¬ 
ration that went into it, the April 1978 protest 
was to the anti-nuclear movement in Colorado 
what a baby’s first step is to a parent: It had 
been tottering, carefully supported, and now it 
was finally off and walking on its own. But the 
real importance of the April protest—the fac¬ 
tor which would keep the issues prominently 
displayed before the public—began to emerge 
only as the thousands of protest participants 
packed up their gear, climbed back into their 
vehicles and started the journey home. Long 
before the traffic created by this exodus had 
cleared out of the area, about 120 protesters 
began to pitch camp for the night on the rail 
spur south of the plant where it crossed Route 
72. They had begun the symbolic blockade that 
was to cap the massive protest, but which in¬ 
stead would turn into an unplanned year-long 
occupation. 


22 


A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 



CHAPTER TWO 

O n the Monday morning following the dem¬ 
onstration, protesters huddled beneath 
their tents and a makeshift plastic shelter in 
a largely futile effort to stay dry. Two wild 
doves, released during the mass rally two 
days earlier, perched on the tent frame, and an 
American flag wafted in the cold breeze. The 
rain and spring snow had come down almost 
nonstop since the occupation began Saturday 
night, and the group by this time had vowed to 
stay on the tracks until Wednesday, when Pres¬ 
ident Carter planned to visit the Solar Energy 
Research Institute in Golden for a Sun Day ad¬ 
dress. The remaining 35 die-hards had also ad¬ 
opted a name for themselves, the Rocky Flats 
Truth Force, in an attempt to be identified as 


separate from the Rocky Flats National Ac¬ 
tion Group, the umbrella organization that 
was a main planner of the weekend’s activi¬ 
ties, and the American Friends Service Com¬ 
mittee. Those groups opposed the rail occupa¬ 
tion because they felt it would jeopardize the 
positive effects of Saturday’s demonstration. 
But Truth Force members said it would speed 
conversion of the weapons facility to non¬ 
nuclear production by increasing community 
awareness and impairing the flow of materials 
into and out of the plant. 

With food and supplies coming in from area 
residents and messages of support for Satur¬ 
day’s demonstration pouring in from around 
the country and abroad, as they would lat¬ 
er come for the rail occupation itself, the pro¬ 
testers were geared for a lengthy stay. They 
planned to present Carter with a statement 


23 



















A CRITICALITY 

of the Truth Force’s goals and a call for con¬ 
version of the plant. If he failed to respond, a 
Truth Force spokeswoman said, the occupation 
would be “indefinite.” 

As these plans were being discussed on Mon¬ 
day, about 75 anti-nuclear activists were stag¬ 
ing a rally in Platteville, the site of the Fort 
St. Vrain nuclear power plant, about 50 miles 
north of Boulder. And when Truth Force mem¬ 
bers awoke Tuesday morning to overcast skies, 
the news came that 260 anti-nuclear protest¬ 
ers had been arrested in Barnwell, South Caro¬ 
lina, after occupying property belonging to the 
Allied General Nuclear Services plant. Those 
demonstrators, members of the Palmetto Alli¬ 
ance, were part of about 1,000 protesters who 
had marched from a 20-acre field campsite to 
the plant gates the day before. The Barnwell 
plant had been the site of a sister demonstra¬ 
tion on Saturday. 

News of the arrests provided conversation for 
the activists on the tracks Tuesday, the first pre¬ 
cipitation-free day since the occupation began. 
Dan Ellsberg spent part of the day writing in his 


May 4, 1978 - Erecting a mailbox as a symbol 
of what had become home to a handful of de¬ 
termined people, the group displayed its new 
name. They originally came up with "Rocky 
Flats Satyagraha," the term India's Mahatma 
Gandhi invented for his nonviolent campaigns. 
Later they settled on its literal translation, Rocky 
Flats Truth Force. Bottom: The American flag 
and the solar banner flying above the main 
shelter would become a familiar sight to anyone 
driving by on Highway 93. 

Following pages: Inside "headquarters" Daniel 
Ellsberg huddles in the cold with fellow protest¬ 
ers as they share a meal and review the most 
recent press coverage about their action. 


OF CONSCIENCE 

journal, while others sang or played musical in¬ 
struments. There was talk of whether authori¬ 
ties would respond to the Rocky Flats occupation 
with arrests, as they had done in South Carolina. 

But so far, authorities at the plant and the 
county sheriff’s department had expressed lit¬ 
tle interest in removing the protesters from the 
tracks, despite their stated intent to remain at 
least until a response was received from Cart¬ 
er—an unlikely occurrence. Even the protest¬ 
ers’ promise to risk arrest on the tracks failed 
to stir officials. “We don’t have any concern 
about it,” one Rockwell officer was quoted as 
saying. “All I can say is that I hope they don’t 
catch cold.” 

Some protesters did, nonetheless, catch cold, 
as the weather would remain wintry for anoth¬ 
er two weeks before the Colorado springtime 
set in for good. 

President Carter was presented with a state¬ 
ment on Wednesday by two Truth Force mem¬ 
bers, but no response was forthcoming. One of 
the delegates, Paul Bendt of Boulder, said Carter 
“thanked me, but gave no reaction if he support¬ 
ed us.” In his address, although it offered little 
encouragement to the Truth Force, Carter called 
nuclear energy “wasteful” and said its use was 
“incompatible to our way of life.” 

A Rocky Flats Truth Force mailbox was hung 
on a fencepost near the railway encampment 
after the brief meeting with Carter, indicating 
the group’s stay might be longer than previous¬ 
ly anticipated. On Thursday, Ellen Klaver and 
Roy Young of the Truth Force met with report¬ 
ers to announce that the organization did in¬ 
deed intend to hold its ground for a while lon¬ 
ger; this time, the cut-off date was to be May 
27, the day of the United Nations Nuclear Dis¬ 
armament Conference in New York. 


25 
























A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 



30 


A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 



Preceding Pages: May 5, 1978 - The storm con¬ 
tinues as Jefferson County Sheriff's Department 
officers tear down the Truth Force encampment 
and arrest all the protesters. Two days earlier 
the group had announced plans to continue 
the occupation indefinitely - or until May 27, 
the day of the United Nations Nuclear Disar¬ 
mament Conference in New York - prompting 
Rockwell International officials to take action. 

Opposite: Daniel Ellsberg flashes a victory 
sign to reporters as police lead him and the 
others arrested to waiting buses, which would 
transport them to Golden for legal processing. 
Above: Members of the Truth Force congratu¬ 
late each other aboard a police bus en-route 
to the Jefferson County Jail. It had been a suc¬ 
cessful, nonviolent arrest. 


Klaver and Young said they anticipated ar¬ 
rest within a few days, and that reinforcements 
from Berkeley, California, were expected soon 


to relieve the now-weary track sitters. The pair 
said arrests, and subsequent trials, would keep 
the anti-nuclear issue before the public. 

Officials of Rockwell International, mean¬ 
while, were in an all-day meeting discussing 
what to do about the Truth Force occupation, 
and how best to get the issue off the airwaves 
and out of the public view. Since officials at the 
Denver-Rio Grande Railroad had expressed no 
interest in removing the protesters when con¬ 
tacted by a Boulder reporter, any move to be 
made was left to Rockwell. 

It didn’t take long for Rockwell to act. Dur¬ 
ing a snowstorm on Friday morning, Jefferson 
County Sheriff’s Department officers, at the re¬ 
quest of Rockwell, tore down the Truth Force 
encampment and marched the protesters off to 
jail on charges of criminal trespassing and ob¬ 
struction of a railway, putting an abrupt, albeit 
temporary, end to the six-day occupation. Ells- 


31 









A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 



32 







A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


berg and the other activists flashed peace—or 
victory—signs at the cameramen and reporters 
as they were led to waiting vans which would 
transport them to Golden for processing. 

A minor fire in a non-radioactive production 
building at the plant that same day served to 
remind observers of why the protesters were 
there. Although the fire, which caused about 
$5,000 in damage, was 
called a “non-reportable 
incident” by Department 
of Energy officials, Dr. 

Johnson of the Jefferson 
County Health Depart¬ 
ment was, as usual, vo¬ 
cal about the dangers it 
presented. The sprinkler 
system worked proper¬ 
ly to extinguish the fire, 
he conceded, but his con¬ 
cern was the safety re¬ 
cord of Rocky Flats. As 
far back as 1957, a fire 
had ignited 48 pounds 
of plutonium. At least 25 
employees of the plant 
were contaminated be¬ 
yond permissible lev¬ 
els during another plu¬ 
tonium fire. In 1969, a 
fire caused $50 million 
in damage, involving 
300 workers in an eight- 
month cleanup. 

“They are continuing to have a series of un¬ 
planned events,” Johnson said. 

By midday Sunday, the protesters, now very 
deserving of the “die-hard” description pinned 
on them by the media, were back. Preceded by 


a scout who was to locate access roads lead¬ 
ing through farmland to the tracks and secu¬ 
rity forces posted to receive them, a group of 
22 Truth Force members, led by men carrying 
large American and sun-power flags, marched 
the two miles through the snow before arriv¬ 
ing at their new campsite, where they began 
constructing walls of snow to shelter their en¬ 


campment. Security officers, wearing black riot 
helmets, hurried from their posts at the plant’s 
west access road and a railway underpass sev¬ 
eral thousand yards south of the Rocky Flats 
property. Even as snowshoers and cross-coun- 



Opposite top: At a press conference later that same day Truth Force 
spokespersons Daniel Ellsberg, Ellen Klaver and Roy Young read a state¬ 
ment declaring the group's determination to go back to the tracks and risk 
a second arrest in order to accomplish their goal. Bottom: As it became 
apparent that the future held opportunity for many occasions of civil dis¬ 
obedience, the Truth Force began to hold "C.D." classes for the grow¬ 
ing ranks of supporters turned potential arrestees. The classes became 
required curriculum for anyone participating in an action. 

Following pages: May 7, 1978 - The group was back, after marching two 
miles through a deep accumulation of spring snow, to set up a new camp¬ 
site on a ridge overlooking the nuclear weapons facility. 


33 























A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


try skiers carried supplies to the group, the of¬ 
ficers warned of imminent arrests. 

The new campsite was on land owned by a 
rancher named Marcus Church, who had filed 
a $23-million lawsuit against Rockwell and 
the Department of Energy for allegedly con¬ 
taminating the land where he grazed his cat¬ 
tle. Church gave no indication of whether he 
would press trespassing complaints against the 
Truth Force, but his attorney would let it be 
known that he was not pleased with the pub¬ 
licity surrounding the occupation. After the ini¬ 
tial contact with Rockwell security personnel, 
the protesters settled in for the first cold night, 
wondering whether the promised arrests would 
materialize. 

They were not long in coming. Late Mon¬ 
day afternoon, 23 persons were arrested on 
the tracks when they attempted to block a 
train entering the plant by placing their bod¬ 
ies in its path. The protesters sang “we shall not 
be moved” as sheriff’s deputies jumped down 
from two cabooses and began lifting bodies off 
the rails and carrying them to the waiting bus. 
Again, they were taken to the Jefferson County 
Fairgrounds for processing on the same charg¬ 
es of criminal trespassing and obstruction of 
a railway, filed by the Department of Energy. 
For some, including Ellsberg, it was the second 
arrest on the tracks, and they would this time 
be required to post a $500 bond before being 
released. As the protesters were exacting their 
small toll from the weapons facility, the gov¬ 
ernment showed it could retaliate in like terms. 

The Truth Force learned in advance that those 
occupying the tracks would be arrested, and 
protesters had packed their gear in preparation 
rather than allowing the campsite to be taken 
apart by deputies once again. Initially, they stood 


in a small circle near the railway singing and 
chanting softly as the train approached. When 
the four cars pushed by a pair of locomotives 
came into view, the protesters dashed onto the 
tracks. They offered no resistance when being 
arrested, but vowed to return. 

In an effort to adapt to the government’s ap¬ 
parent new policy of arrest, the Truth Force’s 
strategy became one of sending smaller groups 
of protesters to the plant every two to three days. 
The first group went just two days after the at¬ 
tempted blockade of the train, and area church 
groups and the Los Angeles Greenpeace organi¬ 
zation offered volunteers to continue the effort. 
So far, 43 persons had been arrested during the 
occupation, and in anticipation of legal expens¬ 
es, benefit performances by local artists of vari¬ 
ous sorts began to be booked into area clubs. 

More arrests took place on Friday, May 12, 
with Ellsberg and others being taken in for the 
third time, but soon the Department of Energy, 
wishing to avoid further publicity, allowed the 
protesters to remain camped on the tracks un¬ 
der the watchful eyes of Rockwell security of¬ 
ficers. During this fourth occupation, the Truth 
Force constructed shelters to protect members 
from the sun’s heat rather than from the wind 
and snow. Protesters moved slowly as they 
erected a banner reading “swords into plow¬ 
shares” over the rails. 


In a classic reenactment of the silent scene from 
the movie "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance 
Kid," [and in what would become the iconic im¬ 
age of the civil disobedience actions at Rocky 
Flats] Jefferson County officers take the part of 
the Superposse by emerging from the blocked 
train and struggling through the deep snow - as 
if in slow-motion - to arrest the protestors hud¬ 
dled together in a tiny group on the tracks. 


36 













A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


CHAPTER THREE 

A fter refusing to post bond, set at $5,000 
for those arrested three times on the tracks, 
$2,500 for those arrested twice, and $500 for 
first-timers, Ellsberg and eight others were 
transferred from the 
Jefferson County jail 
to Clear Creek County 
because of overcrowd¬ 
ing at the Colden facil 
ity. Although in Clear 
Creek they were given 
“the sort of treatment 
one expects a John 
Mitchell or an Ehrlich- 
man to enjoy,” in Ells- 
berg’s words, the pro¬ 
testers were anxious to 
be free to pursue their 
task. Ellsberg himself 
left the jail after the 
weekend because of 
speaking engagements 
on the West Coast and 
m Washington, D.C. 

T he protesters had de¬ 
clined to post bond be¬ 
cause of a ruling by Jef¬ 
ferson (anility District 
(lourt fudge Kim (iold- 
berger, who had stipu¬ 
lated, as a condition of 
the bond, that the ten 
activists jailed could neither enter the Rocky 
Mats property nor take part in the railway oc¬ 
cupation. The protesters felt that amounted to 
being handed a restraining order without the 


benefit of a hearing, and Ellsberg, upon his re¬ 
lease, vowed to return to Colorado either to oc¬ 
cupy the tracks or reclaim his place in jail. 

As the rail occupation continued into summer, 
religious groups held periodic ecumenical ser¬ 
vices at the plant, which also had been the site 
of an alternative commencement ceremony by 

University of Colorado 
graduates. Truth Force 
members developed a 
friendly rapport with 
the security person¬ 
nel posted a short dis¬ 
tance up the tracks, and 
protesters and guards 
frequently exchanged 
waves while watching 
one another through 
binoculars. The Truth 
Force tipi became a fa¬ 
miliar sight to travelers 
passing by on the high¬ 
way to the west. 

Things began to pick 
up again for the Truth 
Force in mid-June, 
when seven more pro¬ 
testers were arrested on 
the rails, bringing the 
total number of arrests 
since the action began 
to over 100. Eater the 
same day, which hap¬ 
pened to be the day set 
aside that month for 
public tours of the facility, poets Peter Orlovsky 
and Allen Ginsberg and four women staged a 
small occupation of their own. The group ar¬ 
rested that morning had been trying to block a 



Above and following pages: May 14, 1978 - It's 
Mother's Day on the tracks and music, prayers, 
poetry and strong fellowship accent the gather¬ 
ing. Two protesters help conceal a Truth Force 
member (beneath straw hat) who had been 
been previously arrested and ordered by the 
court not to set foot on Rockwell Property again. 


38 




A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 



39 







































A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


train entering the plant, and Ginsberg and his 
companions had sneaked past security guards 
to block the same train on its way out. Planted 
three on a rail atop the embankment, they lis¬ 
tened as Ginsberg began to read his “Plutonian 
Ode,” composed the night before. It was inter¬ 
rupted by the screech of metal wheels on iron 
rails as the train rounded a corner and its engi¬ 
neer spotted the group in the locomotive’s path. 
Rockwell security officers and sheriff’s depu¬ 
ties, looking displeased at the turn of events, 
rushed over a nearby hill to arrest the six. Also 
arrested that day was Roy Young, who was 
charged with contempt of court for disobeying 
a judge’s order to stay away from the plant after 
his second arrest. While they were being load¬ 
ed into the sheriff’s department vehicle, jail- 
bound once again, a Truth Force member who 
had not been arrested reminded security offi¬ 
cers that the protesters intended to return again 
and again, and Rockwell officials were at last 
beginning to understand the nature of the prob¬ 
lem that confronted them. “We’re equipped to 
deal with terrorists,” one of them said, “but we 
are not equipped to deal with you people.” The 
fact that a tenuous sort of friendship had de¬ 
veloped between some security officers and the 
protesters did not make the task any easier. Of¬ 
ten the guards would greet soon-to-be-arrested 
protesters by first names, and just as often, the 
track sitters insisted on being carried to wait¬ 
ing police vehicles rather than helping out the 
friendly guards by walking. The security forces 
had come to expect this, however, and it gener¬ 
ated no hostility between the two factions. 

The Truth Force was still on the tracks two 
months later, when a “die-in” was staged to 
commemorate the August 9, 1945 bombing 
of Nagasaki, Japan. After groups of protesters 


marched onto the east and west access road of 
the plant at 11:02 a.m., the time when the Na¬ 
gasaki bomb had been dropped 33 years earli¬ 
er, they sprawled across the pavement in mock 
death. Some symbolically wore gas masks, 
while others had anti-nuclear “peace paint” 
on their faces. After a half-hour, 79 protesters 
were arrested as about two dozen newspersons 
looked on. The arrests, as usual, were cordial. 
Plant security officers and sheriff’s deputies, 
gentle in their handling of the group, first asked 
members whether they were sleeping, then 
asked if they wished to leave the scene or be 
arrested. No one left the scene. The only thing 
that seemed to ruffle the police was a group of 
Truth Force supporters nearby flying the Amer¬ 
ican flag upside down [as a symbol of distress]. 

Both Allen Ginsberg and Dan Ellsberg were 
taken into custody on Nagasaki Day, Ginsberg 
for the second time and Ellsberg for the fourth. 
He had to argue before Judge Goldberger in 
Golden for his release after posting the $5,000 
bond. The 31-year-old judge felt Ellsberg had 
been told to stay away from the plant follow¬ 
ing his release from the Clear Creek jail two 
months earlier, but Ellsberg argued that he had 


Top: May 26, 1978 - More than 30 University 
of Colorado graduates, and local high school 
seniors, opted for an alternative commencement 
ceremony held in a field adjacent to Rocky Flats. 

Bottom: June 16, 1978 - Poets Allen Ginsberg 
and Peter Orlovsky, along with four women, 
stage a small occupation of their own - much 
to the displeasure of Rockwell officials - by 
blocking a train leaving Rocky Flats. The day 
had been set aside for public tours and al¬ 
ready seven people had been arrested that 
morning blocking the same train as it entered 
the plant. 


42 






sv 















A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 



PLUTONIAN ODE by allen ginsberg 


Allen Ginsberg (above with his partner, poet Peter Orlovsky) reciting "Plutonian Ode" 


I 

What new element before us unborn in nature? Is there a new thing under the Sun? 

At last inquisitive Whitman a modem epic, detonative, Scientific theme 

First penned unmindful by Doctor Seaborg with poisonous hand, named for Death’s planet 
through the sea beyond Uranus 

whose chthonic ore fathers this magma-teared Lord of Hades, Sire of avenging Furies, billionaire 
Hell-King worshipped once 

with black sheep throats cut, priesfs face averted from underground mysteries in a single temple 
at Eleusis, 

Spring-green Persephone nuptialed to his inevitable Shade, Demeter mother of asphodel weeping dew, 

her daughter stored in salty caverns under white snow & black hail, grey winter rain or Polar ice, 
immemorable seasons before 


44 








A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


Fish flew in Heaven, before a Ram died by the starry bush, before the Bull stamped sky and earth 

or Twins inscribed their memories in clay or Crab’d flood 

washed memory from the skull, or Lion sniffed the lilac breeze in Eden — 

Before the Great Year began turning its twelve signs, ere constellations wheeled for twenty-four 
thousand sunny years 

slowly round their axis in Sagittarius, one hundred sixty-seven thousand times returning to this night 

O radioactive Nemesis were you there at the beginning black Dumb tongueless unsmelling blast 
of Disillusion? 

I manifest your Baptismal Word after four billion years 

I guess your birthday in Earthling Night, I salute your dreadful presence lasting majestic as the Gods, 

Sabaot, Jehova, Astapheus, Adonaeus, Elohim, Iao, Ialdabaoth, Aeon from Aeon bom ignorant in 
an Abyss of Light, 

Sophia’s reflections glittering thoughtful galaxies, whirlpools of starspume silver-thin as hairs of 
Einstein! 

Father Whitman I celebrate a matter that renders Self oblivion! 

Grand Subject that annihilates inky hands & pages’ prayers, old orators’ inspired immortalities, 

I begin your chant, openmouthed exhaling into spacious sky over silent mills at Hanford, 
Savannah River, Rocky Flats, Pantex, Burlington, Albuquerque 

I yell thru Washington, South Carolina, Colorado, Texas, Iowa, New Mexico, 

where nuclear reactors create a new Thing under the Sun, where Rockwell war-plants fabricate 
this death stuff trigger in nitrogen baths, 

Hanger-Silas Mason assembles the terrified weapon secret by ten thousands, & where Manzano 
Mountain boasts to store 

its dreadful decay through two hundred forty millennia while our Galaxy spirals 
around its nebulous core. 

I enter your secret places with my mind, I speak with your presence I roar your Lion Roar with 
mortal mouth. 

One microgram inspired to one lung, ten pounds of heavy metal dust adrift slow motion over 
grey Alps 


45 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


the breadth of the planet, how long before your radiance speeds blight and death to sentient beings? 

Enter my body or not I carol my spirit inside you, Unapproachable Weight, 

O heavy heavy Element awakened I vocalize your consciousness to six worlds 

I chant your absolute Vanity. Yeah monster of Anger birthed in fear O Most 

Ignorant matter ever created unnatural to Earth! Delusion of metal empires! 

Destroyer of lying Sciences, Devourer of covetous Generals, Incinerator of Armies & Melter of 
Wars! 

Judgment of judgments, Divine Wind over vengeful nations, Molester of Presidents, Death- 
Scandal of Capital politics! Ah civilizations stupidly industrious! 

Canker-Hex on multitudes learned or illiterate! Manufactured Spectre of human reason! O 
solidified Imago of practitioners in Black Arts 

I dare your Reality, I challenge your very being! I publish your cause and effect! 

I turn the Wheel of Mind on your three hundred tons! I make your appellation enter 
mankind’s ear! I embody your ultimate powers! 

My oratory advances on your vaunted Mystery! This breath dispels your braggart fears! I sing 
your form at last 

Behind your concrete & iron walls inside your fortress of rubber & translucent silicon shields in 
filtered cabinets and baths of lathe oil, 

my voice resounds through robot glove boxes & ingot cans and echoes in electric vaults inert of 
atmosphere, 

I enter with spirit out loud into your fuel rod drums underground on soundless thrones and beds 
of lead 

O density! This weightless anthem trumpets transcendent through your hidden chambers and 
breaks through iron doors into the Infernal Room! 

Over your dreadful vibration this measured harmony floats audible, these jubilant tones are 
honey and milk and wine-sweet water poured on the stone block floor. 

I call your name with hollow vowels, I psalm your Fate close by, my breath near deathless ever at 
your side 

to Spell your destiny, I set this verse prophetic on your mausoleum walls to seal you up Eternally 
with Diamond Truth! O doomed Plutonium. 


46 


A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


II 

The Bard surveys Plutonian history from midnight lit with Mercury Vapor till the dawn 

to contemplate a tranquil politic spaced out between Nations’ thought-forms proliferating bureaucratic 

& horrific arm’d Satanic industries projected sudden with Five Hundred Billion Dollar Strength 

around the world same time this text is set in Boulder, Colorado before front range of Rocky 
Mountains 

twelve miles north of Rocky Flats Nuclear Facility in United States of North America, Western 
Hemisphere 

of planet Earth six months and fourteen days around our Solar System in a Spiral Galaxy 
the local year after Dominion of the last God nineteen hundred seventy eight 
Completed as yellow hazed dawn clouds brighten East, Denver city white below 
Blue sky transparent rising empty deep & spacious to a morning star high over the balcony 
above some autos sat with wheels to curb downhill from Flatiron’s jagged pine ridge 
sunlit mountain meadows sloped to rust-red sandstone cliffs above brick townhouse roofs 
as sparrows waked whistling through Marine Streefs summer green leafed trees. 

III 

This ode to you O Poets and Orators to come, you father Whitman as I pass you by, 
you Congress and American people, 

you present mediators, spiritual friends & teachers, you O Master of the Diamond Arts, 

Take this wheel of syllables in hand, these vowels and consonants to breath’s end 

take this inhalation of pure poison to your heart, breath out this blessing from your breast on our 
creation 

forests cities oceans deserts rocky flats and mountains in the Ten Directions pacify with this exhalation, 

enrich this Plutonian Ode to explode its empty thunder through earthen thought-worlds 

Magnetize this howl with heartless compassion, destroy this mountain of Plutonium with 
ordinary mind and body speech, 

thus empower this Mind-guard spirit gone out, gone out, gone beyond, gone beyond me. Wake 
space, so ah! 


H7 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 



not accepted that stipulation as a condition of 
the release. At one point, he was ejected from 
the courtroom during an intense exchange with 
the judge. Later, in his chambers, Goldberger 
conceded the point, agreeing that Ellsberg had 
promised only to adhere to the stipulations of 
the bond while he was outside of Colorado. 
Ginsberg, meanwhile, was released on a per¬ 
sonal recognizance bond. Eight others were 
jailed briefly because of their records of previ¬ 
ous arrests during the 105-day occupation of 
the railway. The 69 activists not jailed on Na¬ 
gasaki Day were transported to the fairgrounds 
in Jefferson County for processing on criminal 
trespassing charges. By now, over 200 arrests 
had resulted from the Truth Force occupation. 

The Truth Force showed no signs of letting 
up. Far from losing participants in the track vigil 
because of the arrest hazards, the group’s ranks 
had swelled with new members. Persons came 


from across the nation to sit on the tracks, but 
perhaps more importantly, members of church 
groups and other residents from the northern 
suburbs of Denver began to find their names 
on the roster of arrestees. Indeed, it became in¬ 
creasingly clear that nearly all segments of the 
community were represented in the Truth Force. 
Some prominent scientists and professionals had 
been arrested during the course of the occupa¬ 
tion, and even the wife of Jefferson County’s 


August 9, 1978 - At 11:02 am, the exact time 
the Atomic Bomb was dropped on Nagasaki, 
Japan 33 years earlier, protesters at Rocky Flats 
staged a mock die-in and sprawled across the 
pavement. Some continued their mock death 
throughout the arrests that soon followed. 

Following pages: That day both Daniel Ellsberg 
and Allen Ginsberg were taken into custody for 
the second and fourth time, respectively. 


48 











— ■ 















A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 



chief public defender was taken into custody on 
the tracks. That event came on September 13, the 
138th day of the occupation. She was arrested 
along with Phil McGowan of Massachusetts, a 
member of the Solar Rollers who had peddled 
cross-country to join the protest, and Molly Tiaz 
of Connecticut, after the trio had attempted to 
block a train entering the plant with their bodies. 


Middle-aged Ginsberg and Ellsberg taken off 
to the grey-haired sheriff’s van — 

But what about Einstein? 

Just two days later, an incident occurred at 
the trackside campsite which set the protest¬ 
ers on edge and provided added ammunition 
for those trying to discredit the Truth Force, 
although most observers took it for what it 
was—a freak happening, that could have come 
at any time, anywhere. 


A new member of the occupation team, Greg¬ 
ory Kreissman of Boulder, produced a knife and 
stabbed Robert Winslow, a resident of a moun¬ 
tain community west of Boulder, who had par¬ 
ticipated in the protest throughout the summer. 
The stabbing arose from a dispute over a piece of 
sage, which Kreissman planned to use in a cleans¬ 
ing ritual. He suspected that Winslow had stolen 

the sage, and additionally 
charged him with contam¬ 
inating the group’s drink¬ 
ing water with plutonium. 
According to eyewitness¬ 
es, Kreissman lunged at 
Winslow with the knife, 
stabbed him, and then 
stabbed himself before ly¬ 
ing down beside the rail¬ 
way. Neither man was 
seriously hurt in the in¬ 
cident, but it kept Truth 
Force members on their 
toes, and carefully screen¬ 
ing new members, for sev¬ 
eral weeks. Kreissman 
was booked into Jefferson 
County’s jail on a first-de¬ 
gree assault charge and 
held on a $10,000 bond. 

As if a brief recov¬ 
ery period had been set 
aside by Department of 
Energy officials, no arrests came for the better 
part of a week. Then, on September 20, two 
protesters—The Truth Force had ceased to oc¬ 
cupy the tracks en masse—were arrested for 
attempting to block a train entering the plant. 
These arrests brought the total to 227 since 
the occupation began on April 29. 


Blue sky cumulus clouded 

over the white-walled Rockwell Corporation bomb plant 
—am I going to stop that? 

Front Range behind us, Denver shining 
in morning light below the factory 
—walking away from the crowd with police & photographers 


- Allen Ginsberg 


50 








. 


















A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


The trains themselves, like the Truth Force 
and its efforts, had become an issue of some con¬ 
troversy. While officials of Rockwell and the 
Department of Energy said they were used to 
transport non-nuclear materials into the plant 
and low-grade radioactive dirt out, Truth Force 
members claimed the cars carried plutonium and 
other dangerous materials destined for use in 
thermonuclear bombs. Throughout the summer, 
arrests had come only when a train needed to get 
through to Rocky Flats. Regardless of what they 
carried, the trains were a necessary component 
of the plant’s operation, and by impairing their 
entry to the plant, the Truth Force was effectively 
tossing a monkey wrench into the works. 

Events in late September and early October 
began to provide impetus, supplementing the 
commitment of Truth Force members, for plans 
to continue the railway occupation through the 
winter. Area newspapers picked up stories off 
the Associated Press and United Press Inter¬ 
national wires that dealt with nuclear issues. 
News came of the efforts of anti-nuclear pro¬ 
testers in other parts of the country, and wire 
stories about Rocky Flats found their way into 
papers in those regions. Encouraging headlines 
such as “Federal court studies nuclear plant 
shutdown,” and upsetting ones like “Cell injury 
found at Rocky Flats,” gave reason for the pro¬ 
testers to stay, even as many members of the 
group were out arranging benefits and walk-a- 
thons to raise money for the defense of those ar¬ 
rested at the tracks over the summer. 

While the three-year-old recommendation of 
the Famm-Wirth Task Force to convert Rocky 
Flats gathered dust, the Truth Force pondered a 
winter occupation and prepared for the upcom¬ 
ing trials of those arrested. The group planned 
to take the anti-nuclear issue to its limits during 


the trial in Golden. They hoped, in effect, to put 
the nuclear industry, rather than the relatively 
small group of trespassers, on trial. Their only 
hope of doing so, in the view of defense attor¬ 
ney Edward Sherman of Denver, was to utilize 
Colorado’s little-known “choice of evils” stat¬ 
ute, which allows the commission of a crime in 
order to prevent a greater harm. 

While Sherman and his team of lawyers pre¬ 
pared for the trial of the first group of protest¬ 
ers—they were to be tried in small groups rather 
than en masse—events and issues concerning the 
Flats facility served to keep the public’s attention 
focused on the nuclear debate. In Broomfield, 
whose water supply had several years earlier 
been contaminated by tritium escaping from the 
plant site, city officials argued that federal ra¬ 
diation exposure limits were too lax, while De¬ 
partment of Energy officers responded that they 
were overly strict. Dr. Carl Johnson showed up, 
dependably, to sharply criticize proposed Envi¬ 
ronmental Protection Agency guidelines on radi¬ 
ation exposure. The following day, October 16, 
Rocky Flats officials reported in local papers that 
almost four million pounds of plutonium-con¬ 
taminated soil had been removed from the plant 
site for disposal in Nevada and Idaho. The soil 
had been contaminated early in the 1960s when 
barrels of oil used in plutonium processing and 
stored outdoors had leaked. The removal proj¬ 
ect, which would cost about a quarter of a mil¬ 
lion dollars, was begun in April 1978, just days 
before the mass rally was staged, giving birth to 
the railway occupation. Now the removal proj¬ 
ect was finished. The occupation would go on 
with added resolve after the announcement on 
October 19 that Rocky Flats had been ordered 
by President Carter to begin production of com¬ 
ponents for the controversial neutron bomb. 


52 


A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


PART II 

THE TRIAL 


53 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


CHAPTER FOUR 

W hen Deputy District Attorney Steve 
Cantrell introduced himself to the 
crowded courtroom on the trial’s opening 
day as representing the people of the State of 
Colorado, a Truth Force member in the audi¬ 
ence muttered under his breath, “Not all of 
them.” The remark set the tone for the en¬ 
tire course of the trial, as defense attorneys 
and witnesses sought to show that there was 
a widespread disagreement in the community 
with the government’s nuclear weapons poli¬ 
cies and that the protesters had acted to pro¬ 
tect the citizens of Colorado. 

A month earlier, a little-noticed jury trial in 
Adams County resulted in the conviction of 
25-year-old Jay Dillon of Ffancock, Maine, on 
charges of criminal trespass and obstruction 
of a railway. Dillon had been arrested with 
two others in July, and was fined $42 plus $8 
in court costs, but he refused to make pay¬ 
ment “as a matter of conscience.” The follow¬ 
ing day, he faced another court test in Adams 
County on charges resulting from his actions 
on the railway tracks later in the summer. He 
was convicted the second time as well, and 
served out his time in jail, at the rate of $2 a 
day, rather than paying fines. Dillon was the 
only Truth Force member to be tried outside 
Jefferson County but despite the different ven¬ 
ue, other protesters worried that the Adams 
County verdict might be a sign of the courts’ 
attitude toward the protest. 

As Dillon had done, the ten defendants in 
the initial Jefferson County trial attempted to 
present their “choice of evils” defense. On trial, 
in addition to Ellsberg, Ellen Klaver and Roy 


Young, were Peter Ediger, a Mennonite pastor 
from Arvada, Colorado, Anna Marie Koop of 
Denver, Jean Zimmerman, a faculty wife and 
mother of two from Indiana, Skye Kerr, a regis¬ 
tered nurse from Massachusetts, Nancy Doub, 
a child-care worker from Boulder, schoolteach¬ 
er Robert Hill of Arvada, and Jack Joppa, the 
manager of an ice cream parlor in Boulder. 

The prosecution, coordinated by Cantrell 
and Deputy District Attorney Gay Guthrie, a 
former college football player with a child’s 
face and a heavyweight boxer’s physique, be¬ 
gan its case on Wednesday, November 15. The 
ten protesters had already admitted to tres¬ 
passing on the railway tracks, but the prose¬ 
cution called several witnesses, including sher¬ 
iff’s deputies and Rockwell security officers, 
to describe the arrest incidents that had tak¬ 
en place since April 29. Over 200 persons had 
been taken into custody during the rail occu¬ 
pation, and those not on trial now had agreed 
to abide by the verdict to be handed down by 
the six-member jury. 

Throughout the first day of testimony, ques¬ 
tions by defense attorney Jonathan Olom con¬ 
cerning the function of the plant and the na¬ 
ture of the materials being transported over 
the railway were met by objections from 
Guthrie. Each time he objected, Guthrie said 
simply, “This is a simple trespass.” The state 
would press that point throughout the trial, 
disregarding any consideration of the motiva¬ 
tion of the protesters. 

The prosecutors attempted only to show that 
the ten defendants had willfully trespassed at 
Rocky Flats. The case must have been one of 
the easiest to prove in the two lawyers’ careers, 
since the defendants had already signed state¬ 
ments to that effect. 


5/4 



A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 



November 16, 1978 - With the strain of the 
past few months showing on his face, Daniel 
Ellsberg meets for the first time, two of the 
expert witnesses who volunteered to testify at 
the trial. At left are Dr. Karl Morgan, a health 
physicist brought to the University of Chicago 
in 1943 to make the first determinations of the 
harmful effects of radioactive materials, and 
Dr. Alice Stewart, a British epidemiologist 
whose studies of nuclear plants confirmed evi¬ 
dence showing that plant workers had a much 
higher risk of cancer than other workers. 


When the defense began to call witnesses on 
the trial’s third day, the jury was kept out of 
the courtroom. Judge Goldberger, the young¬ 
est district court judge in Colorado, had elected 
to hear the defense’s case himself before decid¬ 
ing whether to allow the choice of evils defense. 
Called to the stand were Dr. John Gofman, a 
physicist who isolated the first milligram of 


plutonium for the federal government in the 
early 1940s, Karl Morgan, a health physicist 
brought to the University of Chicago in 1943 
to make the first determinations of the harmful 
effects of radioactive materials, and Dr. Alice 
Stewart, a British epidemiologist whose studies 
of nuclear plants confirmed evidence showing 
that plant workers had a much higher risk of 
cancer than other workers. 

All three said the plant’s location had been a 
very poor choice, and that enough plutonium 
had been released from Rocky Flats during its 
existence to cause “millions” of cancers. Mor¬ 
gan testified that recent data on chlorinated wa¬ 
ter and plutonium indicated that Broomfield’s 
water supply contained a level of contamination 
that would cause residents to run a six-percent 
higher cancer risk than the national average. 

Defendants and courtroom observers drew 
confidence from the testimony of the three sci- 


55 















A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


entists. It seemed to leave little doubt that the 
Rocky Flats plant constituted a serious hazard 
to the population of metropolitan Denver. 

Later, further defense testimony showed 
that efforts by local scientists and health of¬ 
ficials to clean up hazards at Rocky Flats had 
been met with resistance and lies. Anthony 
Robbins, a former executive director of the 
Colorado Department of Health, said he had 
“serious concerns as to whether one could 
believe or trust” statements made by the De¬ 
partment of Energy, and expressed frustra¬ 
tion over past attempts to implement the 
recommendations of the Lamm-Wirth Task 
Force. He testified that official requests by 
Governor Lamm and his own office to phase 
out the plant’s nuclear function had been 
sidestepped and that state officials had been 
deliberately misled by Department of Energy 
officers at the plant and in Washington. Dr. 
Edward Martell, a nuclear chemist with the 
National Center for Atmospheric Research 
in Boulder, said that in 1969, officials at the 
plant had “resisted” suggestions that they test 
soil at Rocky Flats for plutonium contamina- 


The prosecuting attorneys, defense lawyers 
and several defendants meet with Judge Kim 
Goldberger in his chambers to discuss the use 
of Colorado's little known "choice of evils" 
statute (which allows the commission of a 
crime in order to prevent a greater harm) as 
a defense. Goldberger later ruled against the 
approach, not allowing the jury to hear the 
testimony of the expert witnesses. 

Waiting for the Judge, breathing silent 
Prisoners, witnesses. Police - 
the stenographer yawns into her palms. 

-Allen Ginsberg 


tion. He made the tests himself, he testified, 
and found levels of contamination 250 times 
greater than normal “background” levels. 

On Monday, Dr. Carl Johnson was called as 
a defense witness. He, too, had conducted soil 
tests at or near the plant and had found exces¬ 
sive amounts of radiation. Johnson told the 
court he had found levels of radiation 17 times 
higher than background as far away as 20 miles 
from the plant. 

That afternoon, however, Goldberger ruled 
against allowing the seven-member defense 
team to use its choice of evils approach to the 
case. He said the dangers presented by Rocky 
Flats could only be considered imminent, as re¬ 
quired under the statute, if the court engaged 
in speculation. While he was not unmindful of 
those dangers, Goldberger said, there was no 
direct causal relationship between the defen¬ 
dants’ actions and the elimination of the dan¬ 
ger. The Truth Force attorneys, in short, had 
failed to show that blocking the railway would 
terminate the operation of the plant, and no 
evidence was presented showing that “harms, 
evils or injuries” would disappear if the plant 
were closed. 

The ruling was a major setback for the de¬ 
fense, and the jury had now only to decide on 
the matter of trespass, an almost foregone con¬ 
clusion. But before the jury retired, the defen¬ 
dants were given opportunity to explain why 
they felt justified trespassing at the weapons 
plant. 

Several of the protesters took advantage of 
the chance, but there was little advantage to 
be taken. Roy Young, who spoke in emotional 
terms of the health hazard the Truth Force was 
trying to eliminate, was interrupted 34 times 
by objections from prosecutor Cantrell, who 


57 



A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


wished to prevent the choice of evils argument 
from being presented to the jury. 

Defense attorneys, however, were not dis¬ 
turbed by the objections. On the contrary, 
they had encouraged the defendants to raise 
the issue, both as a means of explaining their 
state of mind when committing the act of tres¬ 
pass and to elicit objections from the prose¬ 
cution. This, they hoped, would give the ap¬ 
pearance that the prosecution was attempting 
to hide the truth. 


Skye Kerr told the jury her experience with 
children suffering from leukemia had prompted 
her actions during the railway occupation. 

Nancy Doub, 40, the mother of two teenag¬ 
ers, said she felt “the greatest crime I could com¬ 
mit would be to remain silent.” Then, broach¬ 
ing tears, she faced the jury and said, “It’s not 
fair that we should let young people face this 


alone. We must stand with them together.” 

Dan Ellsberg, whose son had been arrested 
on the tracks during the summer, told the court 
that “ours was the most legitimate presence on 
that territory since 1952.” 

Jean Zimmerman, the homemaker from In¬ 
diana, had taken a similar approach during 
questioning by Gay Guthrie. “I felt that, legal¬ 
ly speaking, the plant was doing more illegal 
things than what I was doing,” she said. 

Guthrie, attempting to get an answer to the 
question of whether she 
had willfully trespassed 
on the Rocky Flats prop¬ 
erty, persisted. 

“You knew you were 
trespassing without the 
permission of the U.S. 
government that owns 
the plant?” 

“The U.S. government 
is precisely the person 
I wanted to speak to,” 
Zimmerman responded. 

Guthrie: “One more 
time. When you were 
there, you knew you 
were on U.S. government 
property without permis¬ 
sion, didn’t you?” 

“I was there without 
their permission,” Zimmerman finally con¬ 
ceded. “But they were there without my per¬ 
mission.” 

Other defendants spoke of “mass genocide” 
and a “higher law recognized by people of con¬ 
science” to justify their actions. 

Ellen Klaver, a seasonal forest ranger, told the 
jury, “None of us felt like we were criminals.” 



Three-year-old Kristi Zimmerman (the daughter of defendant Jean 
Zimmerman) sits on her mother's lap in the courtroom demonstrat¬ 
ing how Ellsberg had taught her to make a peace sign. "It was the 
only way you could do it with handcuffs on," Ellsberg said, recall¬ 
ing earlier arrests during anti-Vietnam demonstrations 


58 



A CRITICALITY 


TESTIMONY 

BY DANIEL ELLSBERG 

A s a former official speaking on matters 
which so many officials have concealed, 
denied and lied about over the years, I was glad 
to have the opportunity in court to testify to 
my knowledge and beliefs on oath, under pen¬ 
alty of perjury. I am taking advantage of the 
existence of that sworn testimony by presenting 
it below, in answer to the same questions now. 
A few irrelevant exchanges have been omitted, 
some stenographic errors corrected, and several 
sentences edited to clarify my confusing oral 
syntax; these are the only changes from the 
record publicly available at the court. I have 
added some additional notes as “D.E. Note:.” 

Daniel Ellsberg, called as a witness by and 
on behalf of the defendants herein, having been 
first duly sworn, was examined and testified on 
November 27, 1979 as follows: 

DIRECT EXAMINATION 

Q: Mr. Ellsberg, I think it would be appropri¬ 
ate to tell the jury something about you. What 
is your education? Tell us about what kind of 
education you have. 

A: I went to public school in Detroit, Michi¬ 
gan. I was a scholarship student. Then to a pri¬ 
vate high school in Broomfield Hills. I was a 
scholarship student at college at Harvard Uni¬ 
versity. I had postgraduate training at Cam¬ 
bridge University in England, again on a Fel¬ 
lowship, a Woodrow Wilson Fellowship. 

Q: Would you speak a little louder? Can the 
jury hear? 


OF CONSCIENCE 

A: Okay. I came back to Harvard and was a 
teaching Fellow and took my examinations for 
a doctorate, that was now 1953. And ’54, then 
I went into the Marine Corps for three years. I 
came back— 

Q: Before that, let’s confine ourselves to edu¬ 
cation. Did you get a doctor of philosophy? 

A: I have a Ph.D. from Harvard in 1962 [in 
economics]. 

Q: All right. Should I call you Dr. Ellsberg? 

A: Dan is fine. 

Q: Dan? Okay, Dan. What was the nature of 
your thesis for your Ph.D.? What was the sub¬ 
ject matter? 

A: It was on the subject of probability and of 
decision making under uncertainty. It was called 
“Risk, Ambiguity and Decision.” 

Q: That’s highfalutin. What does all that 
mean? 

A: It was an abstract analysis of the problem 
of making choices under conditions of great 
uncertainty, confusion, among alternatives, to 
meet various goals. It’s applied in economics 
to the problems of business firms, or in gov¬ 
ernments to making policies in the Defense De¬ 
partment. The same kind of analysis is applied 
to choose between weapon systems, strategic 
plans, different kinds of strategic projects and 
so forth. So an economics background is prized, 
is used for this kind of work in the Defense De¬ 
partment and that is the way I came to do it. 

Q: As a strategic analyst, your methods or 
methodology would be applicable, I assume, to 
armaments, war productions and so forth? 

A: It’s believed to be applicable. You’re hired 
on that basis. Whether that’s a good basis or 
not I have come to have some doubts, but it 
gets you hired and from there on it’s on-the-job 
training, essentially. 


59 



A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


Q: All right. Now, after your formal educa¬ 
tion, did you participate in any war effort, per¬ 
sonally? Were you in the services at all? 

A: I volunteered for the Marine Corps in 1954. 

Q: That was after you were graduated? 

A: I had graduated from college and I had 
been deferred, so I thought it was my duty to 
enlist when my deferment was up, and I be¬ 
came an officer, a platoon leader, and a compa¬ 
ny commander in the Marine Corps. 

Q: How many years were you in the Marines? 

A: I enlisted for a period of two years and 
I was due to get out in 1956. I extended for 
a year because my battalion in which I was a 
company commander was going to the Med¬ 
iterranean, expected to take part in combat, 
which actually came about. That was the Suez 
crisis in 1956; so I stayed in an extra year to be 
with them. 

Q: And then did you get out of the service, 
and if so, what did you do? 

A: I stayed in the reserves as long as I could, 
actually, without going for active duty. I asked 
them for extensions on that because I was at 
the Rand Corporation for about 10 years in all 
as a weapons system analyst and later as a stra¬ 
tegic analyst. 

Q: What is a “weapons system analyst”? As 
a lay person I really would like some guidance 
as to that. 

A: Someone who evaluates, analyzes and 
makes recommendations on the effects of pro¬ 
posed or existing weapons systems, like bomb¬ 
ers or missiles or new warheads, on our nation¬ 
al security. In a broad sense you try to devise 
aims, strategic aims, criteria by which to judge 
these systems, and say whether deterrence, for 
example, of a Russian attack, would be better 
served by one weapon rather than another, or 


by how many weapons. It’s a kind of quantita¬ 
tive analysis for which, again, economists have 
been found to have good training. 

Q: What did you want to say, Dan? 

A: Well, I could illustrate that best, really, 
with the piece of analysis that I was called on 
to do almost on arriving at the Rand Corpora¬ 
tion in 1958. 

Q: Now, before you get on with that— 

A: It brought me to the tracks at Rocky Flats, 
but it illustrates the nature of the work very well. 

Q: You served as a strategic analyst; was that 
for the United States government? 

A: The Rand Corporation was a nonprofit 
corporation working in those days almost exclu¬ 
sively for the Defense Department, almost com¬ 
pletely for the Air Force. Later, my own work 
was for the Secretary of Defense—the Office of 
the Secretary of Defense. So their yearly contract 
came from out of the U.S. Defense budget, but 
we were paid directly by the Rand Corporation. 

Q: But it was for the benefit of the U.S. gov¬ 
ernment? 

A: It was a nonprofit corporation. All our 
work was to be for the public interest in the 
field of national security. 

Q: The programs you engaged in were for the 
United States government? 

A: For the Defense Department. 

Q: And would you characterize what you did 
in the period you were with Rand and your func¬ 
tions as a strategic analyst as you described it? 

A: That work, which is best described as stra¬ 
tegic analysis, was done primarily as a consultant 
directly to officials of the United States govern¬ 
ment. Rand would pay my salary on the under¬ 
standing that I would be loaned, in effect, to the 
people for whom I was directly conducting re¬ 
search, as a kind of assistant in writing memos 


60 


A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


to them. This included to McGeorge Bundy, who 
was then the Special Assistant to the President, 
a national security job that Henry Kissinger did 
later or Brzezinski now; to the Secretary of De¬ 
fense, Robert McNamara: To his deputy, Deputy 
Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric, and in 
particular to the Assistant Secretary of Defense 
who was then Paul Nitze. I also did consulting 
work for the State Department. 

Q: How long did you do that kind of consult¬ 
ing work? 

A: That was most of my work at the Rand 
Corporation—I joined them, as I say, in 1958— 
from late ’60 to 1964 when I left Rand and 
joined the Defense Department as a full-time 
employee on the civil service. 

Q: Now, let me interrupt the sequence of 
what you’re telling the jury and His Honor. Mr. 
Ellsberg, did you engage in any service as a ci¬ 
vilian for the United States government? 

A: Well, all of this was as a civilian after my 
three years in the Marine Corps. 

Q: Well, did you serve in Vietnam as a civilian? 

A: In 1965 I volunteered to go to Vietnam 
and I joined the State Department for that pur¬ 
pose. I switched, then, from the Defense De¬ 
partment, where I had the rank of a GS-18 [the 
highest civil service “super-grade,” equivalent 
to the military rank of major general] for the 
Foreign Service Reserve and [as FSR-1, high¬ 
est FSR grade] went to Vietnam to serve in the 
embassy there. I was there for two years, and 
would have been there longer but I got hepati¬ 
tis and came back. 

Q: Now, you have sketched briefly for us 
some of your activities for the United States 
government. You said the Defense Department, 
the State Department, and so on. But could 
you, Mr. Ellsberg, could you describe the char¬ 


acter of your work as a consultant, or expertise, 
what sort of materials did you deal with and so 
on? What knowledge did you acquire for which 
you engaged in consulting for the government? 

A: Since most of this work is classified and re¬ 
quires a number of clearances, in fact, beyond top 
secret—which I had—most of my learning did 
take place on the inside, since this sort of thing 
cannot even be discussed under current practice 
in our universities or other places because it is re¬ 
garded as secret. Picking it up, then, by reading 
war plans, and just visiting, actually, war bases 
and command posts—I was studying two sub¬ 
jects in particular. One, the structure and the con¬ 
tent of our strategic war plans, our nuclear war 
plans. Second, what’s called “Command and 
Control of Nuclear Weapons,” which has to do 
with the “nervous system” for armed forces—the 
communications systems, the command posts, 
the decision procedures. There, by the way, I was 
able to apply the kind of abstract notions that I 
developed in my economic work on how deci¬ 
sions might well be made or should be made, to 
the process of the President’s decision problem as 
to when or whether to push a “Go” button, as 
they say in the Pentagon. In other words, to order 
the execution of our nuclear war plans. It’s a rela¬ 
tively “simple”—and, of course, irreversible—de¬ 
cision if the decision is “Go.” 

In that context, then, I read all of the structure 
of our war plans in the Pacific. I became prob¬ 
ably as familiar with the content of those war 
plans, the plans that would have to be execut¬ 
ed, as any civilian in the country, and I was as¬ 
signed the task in 1961 of writing the Kennedy 
Administration official guidance, top secret, to 
the Joint Chiefs of Staff for the strategic nuclear 
war plans. The draft that I wrote was signed by 
Mr. McNamara and issued by him as a directive 


61 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


to the Joint Chiefs, and it remained the basis for 
strategic war planning through the early ‘60s. I 
knew that because I reviewed those plans year 
by year—I was the only civilian to do that—for 
Mr. Gilpatric, the Deputy Secretary. 

Q: Mr. Ellsberg, in your studies and research 
relating to your role as a consultant to the 
United States government, did you have oc¬ 
casion to study and consider the dangers and 
risks of war plans? 

A: Well, this was my main consideration, not 
just with war plans, but with procedures and 
everything else. What changes would make a 
nuclear war more likely, what developments 
would make a Soviet attack likely, what dan¬ 
gers would make more likely an accidental ex¬ 
plosion—I am particularly concerned, myself, 
with that—or unauthorized use of weapons. 

Q: By that, you mean by “accidental”— 

A: An accidental explosion during an alert, 
for example; what are the risks of that? They 
are very great, in my opinion. 

After a recess 

Q: I think I asked you just before we ad¬ 
journed about, in your experiences, whether 
you acquired as part of your expertise, insights 
and knowledge relating to the dangers and 
risks of war plans? 

A: Yes. It was these feelings that brought me, 
really, to this area and to the vicinity of the 
Rocky Flats Plant, based entirely on the work 
that I had done before Vietnam in the Defense 
Department and the White House on these 
problems—two conclusions in particular which 
were very much in my mind, and which, by the 
way, I discussed on the tracks with the people 
there to share with them my feelings of why the 


situation was as urgent as it was. 

I was telling them what I learned almost 20 
years ago and which I reported to McGeorge 
Bundy about 18 years ago: my feeling that the 
machinery of nuclear war that had been built 
up by my colleagues at Rand and the Defense 
Department was essentially out of control—out 
of presidential control, and as I saw it, human 
control—and that the risks of thermonuclear 
war resulting from our own well-intentioned 
efforts, the risks were very great, and greater 
than the President himself could know. 

Two points in particular which are relevant 
today I learned from reading the plans. First, 
that the strategic planning of the United States, 
as I read it, was based not mainly—not mainly, 
let alone “only”—on the problem of deterring a 
surprise Soviet nuclear attack, a problem which 
I joined the Rand Corporation to work on [The 
information] was then classified at a higher 
level than I had access to when I joined Rand 
[higher than top secret], but by 1961 when I 
was working in the Pentagon, I learned that the 
Soviet Union at that time had four ICBMs—at 
a time I had expected hundreds, in that year, 
thousands soon after. At a time when we had— 
B-52s and B-47s—about 2,000 intercontinen¬ 
tal bombers, and over 30 Polaris Missiles, 40 
Atlas and Titan warheads and a thousand tac¬ 
tical bombers within range of Russia: At that 
time the Soviets had less than 200 interconti¬ 
nental bombers, and, as I say, I learned with a 
clearance higher than my colleagues at Rand, 
they had four ICBMs. So the problem that I was 
working on, I discovered, was not that of deter¬ 
ring a Soviet attack, but something else. 

The two points I reported to McGeorge Bun¬ 
dy [in February 1961] which I believed the Pres¬ 
ident did not know, relating to these dangers, 


62 


A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


were that, first, under the Eisenhower Admin¬ 
istration a delegation had been made, which 
I had discovered in my research in the Pacif¬ 
ic, authorizing subordinate commanders to 
start thermonuclear war without a direct com¬ 
mand from the President, contrary to my prior 
knowledge and to official public statements. I 
believed that President Kennedy was not aware 
of that, and that evidently was the case because 
I was assigned by his assistant, Kennedy’s as¬ 
sistant [McGeorge Bundy], to investigate that. 
And eventually it was discovered that delega¬ 
tion had been made. And Kennedy renewed it, 
and Johnson renewed it. 

But I was aware, and reported, that this not 
only put in the hands of a General Haig, let 
us say, a four-star general, the power to start 
a nuclear war, but that these four-star admi¬ 
rals and generals—and this the President could 
not know, it’s a detail below his attention—in 
turn delegated that authority to one-star gener¬ 
als and to colonels and majors whom I inter¬ 
viewed in the Pacific. 

D.E. Note: This highly secret delega¬ 
tion of authority was originally given by 
President Eisenhower in 1957 in signed 
personal letters to the highest-level the¬ 
ater commanders, such as Commander- 
In-Chief Pacific and head of U.S. NATO 
forces, authorizing them to initiate nucle¬ 
ar operations without an express order 
from the President, (only) in certain spec¬ 
ified urgent conditions, including outage 
of communications to highest authorities. 
The White House and the Pentagon have 
repeatedly refused to comment, during 
the Carter Administration, as to whether 
such delegation exists today. 


Q: Mr. Ellsberg— 

A: So that the risk of war—I am sorry. 

Q: You understand, Mr. Ellsberg, that, you 
know, that is such fascinating testimony, but you 
understand that we are concerned with respect 
to that testimony with what was in your mind 
based upon your acquisitions of knowledge in 
the years that you were consulting and so re¬ 
garding the dangers of nuclear war. And you are 
skilled in that, that is your expertise; is it? 

A: I am not expressing skill, because fortu¬ 
nately no one has had on-the-job training in 
thermonuclear war. 

Q: For which we can be thankful. 

A: And we study it, and think about it; but 
no one is an expert, and in my opinion, no 
one can be trusted with thermonuclear weap¬ 
ons. But responding to your point, I told this 
material to the other people on the tracks, 
not to pass the time, but in part to explain to 
them why I was there and why I thought they 
were right to be there. 

Q: Now, what you are saying is that your 
evaluation or judgment of a condition here 
in Colorado was to a great extent predicated 
upon your experiences and knowledge? 

A: Yes. If I may add the one point—I said there 
were two, and I will briefly mention the other. 

Q: Please do. 

A: We are talking about, of course—and this 
is my whole understanding of why we [defen¬ 
dants] are here, all of us—we are talking about 
the planned and practiced use of the end prod¬ 
ucts of Rocky Flats, because all of the thermo¬ 
nuclear weapons have fission atomic Hiroshi¬ 
ma-type cores, “triggers” made at Rocky Flats, 
all of them. The second point, then, that I re¬ 
ported [to McGeorge Bundy] was this: that it 
had been withheld from him until that time by 


63 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


the military, that our [general war] plan called 
for striking first in many situations in which 
there had not been a prior nuclear attack on us 
or our allies. 

D.E. Note: The existing Joint Chiefs of 
Staff plan for general war in early 1961, 
the Joint Strategic Capabilities Plan, and 
its predecessors—the plans for which 
I drafted major modifications in April 
1961—called for initiating all-out nucle¬ 
ar attacks on the “Sino-Soviet Bloc,” in¬ 
cluding all major cities in Russia and Chi¬ 
na, in a wide range of situations including 
certain crises and non-nuclear hostilities 
where there was no immediate threat of 
enemy use of nuclear weapons—indeed, 
in all circumstances involving armed con¬ 
flict between U.S. forces, anywhere, and 
Soviet combat units. 

The plan at that time for initiating strategic 
war, by the Joint Chiefs of Staff’s own calcu¬ 
lation, proposed to kill—as I read it in their 
chart—proposed to kill 325 million people in 
Russia and China alone, not counting their re¬ 
taliation against us, not counting countries 
that would be wiped out from the fallout alone 
from those weapons, including Japan, Finland, 
Pakistan and others. So that the plan accepted 
the possibility—not for deterrence [of nuclear 
attack] but in a case such as a Berlin crisis, and 
a Cuban crisis where we [later] confronted So¬ 
viet troops in planning attacks—that it would 
lead, by use of the products that have been pro¬ 
duced at Rocky Flats for 25 years and more, to 
the death of half a billion people. 

And this was a plan, as I reported, that I saw 
not under control, even, of the single man elect¬ 


ed to that job, the President, but of a thousand 
majors who had their fingers on “Go” buttons 
all over the world, with no “Stop” buttons in 
that whole system. 

D.E. Note: As in the film “Dr. Strange- 
love,” it was the case at that time in the 
Pacific Command and in the Strategic 
Air Command (SAC) that once an au¬ 
thenticated “Go” message had been re¬ 
ceived (not necessarily originated by the 
President) no procedure existed or was 
permitted for issuing subsequently an 
authenticated “Stop” order under any cir¬ 
cumstances, even if the original “Go” had 
been, in fact, unauthorized or based on 
error or accident, and even if the Soviets 
should surrender unconditionally during 
the 12 hours or more it took most bomb¬ 
ers to reach their targets. 

Q: Mr. Ellsberg, could you tell the jury the 
precise knowledge or incident which provoked 
you to come to Rocky Flats in April or when¬ 
ever you came? 

A: Yes. It happened 19 years ago when a mem¬ 
ber of the physics department, my colleague at 
Rand, later my friend, Samuel Cohen—Sam Co¬ 
hen—came to my office and asked my help in 
evaluating a new weapon that he had invented. 

He was a “weaponeer,” as they were called, 
meaning that he is a man who spent his life¬ 
time inventing new hydrogen weapons, actual¬ 
ly, and what he had was a new thermonuclear 
hydrogen weapon, the kind for which the [nu¬ 
clear fission] triggers have always been made at 
Rocky Flats. This was a very “miniature” weap¬ 
on, which he called the “Neutron Bomb.” 

Q: All right, that was the “Neutron Bomb.” 


64 



A CRITICALITY 

Now, how did you—I assume you had heard 
about this? 

A: No, not at all. 

Q: Did you have fears about it? 

A: My work was working every day with cal¬ 
culations of millions, tens of millions dead. I 
had in my head the weapons characteristics of 
a hundred different weapons. This was just one 
more. When I heard about it, my job was to use 
my intelligence, my education, what I was paid 
for, to help Sam Cohen answer the questions of 
what is this good for, what effects will it have. 

He was particularly concerned, as I heard 
him, because the military didn’t like his weap¬ 
on for reasons which we might or might not go 
into. He wanted me to help him think of aims 
and objectives for the United States that could 
be served by it. But he also wanted an objec¬ 
tive evaluation by me of the argument he would 
meet against it, so that he could counter them 
or perhaps modify the weapon. In the first in¬ 
stance, in answer to your question, my reaction 
was very coldblooded: It was one more weap¬ 
on. I had by that time seen a lot of weapons. 

Q: At what point did you begin to relate that 
weapon with Rocky Flats? 

A: Well, at the time in March of this year 
[1978] when I learned that Rocky Flats would 
produce that weapon, if President Carter—re¬ 
versing the decision made earlier by President 
Kennedy and President Johnson to avoid such 
a weapon—should choose to produce it. And if 
he produced it, I learned it would, and will be, 
produced at Rocky Flats. Indeed, I understand it 
is now in effect being produced at Rocky Flats. 

Q: Now, let me ask you this: 19 or 18 years 
after you first heard about this from your col¬ 
league, how do you evaluate the production 
or use of this weapon? What does this mean 


OF CONSCIENCE 

to you, and in what way do you relate that to 
coming to Rocky Flats this year? 

MR. CANTRELL: Your Honor, at this time, 
for the record, I would object to any more tes¬ 
timony considering bombs that are going to 
be used or bombs that haven’t been used. He 
is talking about testimony from 19 years ago. 
He already said that this is not the issue in this 
trial. So, for the record, I would object to any 
more testimony on this. 

THE COURT: The objection for the time 
being is overruled. You may renew it if it gets 
far afield. 

Q: (By Mr. Sherman) Please answer my ques¬ 
tion. Relate just to my questions to expedite this. 

A: My evaluation today is what it was 19 
years ago, and it was not an immediate reaction 
to the idea of nuclear weapons. My profession 
was to work with nuclear weapons. It was a re¬ 
action to this nuclear weapon, and its implica¬ 
tions as I saw them after I had immersed myself 
in the data which its inventor, Sam Cohen, put 
on the blackboard—we had blackboards in our 
offices—and he did it on the blackboard and he 
showed me his memos. And then I told Sam as 
tactfully as I could, and he did become a friend 
later, that I thought his was the most dangerous 
weapon that had been invented since the ther¬ 
monuclear weapon. Lor four reasons, essential¬ 
ly—may I say what those are? 

A: Very concisely, what were the reasons? We 
are concerned with your thoughts, what you 
were thinking—when you came to Rocky Plats 
and petitioned for your grievances. 

A: And of course, none of this is fact, it’s only 
best judgment then, now, mine or anyone’s, this 
weapon was the most likely to be used since 
the Nagasaki weapon. And by virtue of that, it 
lowered American security instantly by its exis- 


65 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


tence, because it exposed us to the opening of 
an era, a new era since Nagasaki and Hiroshi¬ 
ma, of actual nuclear wars; not just a stockpil¬ 
ing, for profit, for threat, for deterrence, but of 
using this weapon. 

Second, that was precisely because of the “vir¬ 
tues” that Sam hoped to see in it and which I 
confirmed were there, and they were tied to this 
third aspect that I am coming to, as well. The 
characteristics of the weapon were that it had 
much less long-lived radioactivity, as I under¬ 
stood it, and therefore, would not have the de¬ 
fect of all of our current weapons of making part 
of the territory we’re trying to defend uninhabit¬ 
able for a period of half a million years. 

With this weapon, Sam, as I understood it, 
hoped that troops could go immediately in, be¬ 
cause the killing mechanism was not fallout but 
prompt radiation, high energy neutrons that 
would be released by the fusion reaction. 

It would kill people, without destroying by 
blast or heat, buildings or tanks. As Sam de¬ 
scribed it, it was a “very efficient, cost-effective 
people-killer.” 

It was for killing people, not for proper¬ 
ty; but that very virtue, as he hoped it would 
be seen, meant that our own decision makers 
would be less inhibited in using it than using a 
weapon that would make the landscape radio¬ 
active forever. 

The third point was that as such, it was a 
first-use weapon only, precisely as I understood 
it to be a relatively clean weapon, and a rel¬ 
atively precise weapon. It had no advantages 
whatever if someone else—in those days, only 
the Soviets—if someone else had already blown 
the buildings down with dirty weapons and 
made the rubble radioactive. So it was no good 
as a deterrent weapon, against nuclear attack, it 


was no good to use “second.” It was only for us¬ 
ing first, but even then only against people who 
didn’t have the nuclear weapons with which 
to reply, that is, people other than Soviets. As 
I told Sam, as I understood it then and now as 
we face the situation, far from being a weapon, 
as we’re told, good against the Soviets, it’s least 
good against Russians because they would be 
certain to reply with their dirty nuclear weap¬ 
ons, of which they have many thousands. 

But it did have advantages against the kind 
of people we actually fought: while I was in 
the Marines, the Koreans, the Indochinese; lat¬ 
er, China in the ‘50s. Against people who can’t 
actually reply with nuclear weapons, it has 
advantages, and thereby would be more like¬ 
ly to be used. We didn’t get into it but I later 
spent several years doing studies of actual cri¬ 
ses. I knew that we had been much closer to 
using the older, “dirty” weapons than Ameri¬ 
cans generally believed, or than I had known 
earlier. Very briefly, to summarize in one sen¬ 
tence: in 1950 in Korea; ’53 in Korea again un¬ 
der Eisenhower; ’54 in Indochina, at Dien Bien 
Phu when I was in the Marine Corps; ’55 the 
Chinese offshore islands; ’58 at Quemoy, again 
the offshore islands; 1961, in Laos under Ken¬ 
nedy; 1968 at KheSanh, in Vietnam; 1969 to 
’72, Vietnam, under Nixon. In every case, to¬ 
tally in secret from the American public, presi¬ 
dents [five of them, known so far, full memoirs 
from the Ford and Carter administrations not 
having appeared yet; every President in every 
term of office since Nagasaki] had threatened 
or prepared to use the actual weapons we have 
made at Rocky Flats. I believe that if they had 
the neutron bomb they would have used that, 
many people would have died, and our security 
would have gone down very sharply. 


66 


A CRITICALITY 

Q: Now, in summary, Mr. Ellsberg, do you 
consider this a great danger and a great risk, I 
assume? 

A: A risk to us [and not only to us]. Because 
after the first use by anyone ... by the Soviets, 
if they should get this bomb, and I believe to my 
best judgment that if we get it they are certain 
to get it, and I don’t want them to have it ... if 
they use it, if we use it, whoever uses a nuclear 
weapon first, and I believe that this is the first 
one to be used, then other weapons will follow. 
Small wars, I believe, will follow, here and there 
in the world, far from us, far from us at first. 
And eventually, the weapons that have been 
stockpiled coming from Rocky Flats and made 
into complete weapons elsewhere and sent out 
to our troops, eventually they will all go off. 
And that will be the end. 

Q: All right. Now, Mr. Ellsberg, please relate 
this knowledge of yours and these beliefs of yours 
to your coming to Rocky Flats. Tell the jury why 
you came. Was the predominant idea because of 
these weapons? The neutron weapon? 

A: The reason for my taking part fully in the 
activity and spending months here away from 
my family, as opposed to other places where the 
same issues could be dealt with and where I am 
also working, is entirely because Rocky Flats is 
currently the only place in the world producing 
the neutron warhead. 

Q: What was your motivation or objective, 
then, in petitioning as I understand you did on 
the property of the government at Rocky Flats? 

A: Well, I am petitioning in a lot of different 
places and a lot of different ways, from the time 
that I knew that the President was considering 
the neutron warhead, and thus that this weapon 
which didn’t yet exist could still be stopped if one 
acted quickly through the democratic process. I 


OF CONSCIENCE 

learned that, as I say, in March [1978], right here 
supporting the effort that was planned, the ear¬ 
lier demonstration. I have spent every day since 
then petitioning, and not just petitioning, help¬ 
ing to alert people to warn them they must act 
quickly, and I have been doing that in Washing¬ 
ton, abroad, here, in direct talks with Congress- 
people, in talks with members of the administra¬ 
tion. Even on the tracks to some extent. 

Before I got here it was my belief that the 
kind of “petition” alone by the people on tri¬ 
al here today [nonviolent civil disobedience] . 
. . That’s different. It’s not just a petition, or 
it’s a special kind of petition. It expresses not 
only what you feel, but how deeply you feel it, 
how important, how urgent, whether it’s some¬ 
thing important enough to take a risk, to take 
time away from your other activities, from your 
family, from your job. It manifests a kind of res¬ 
olution in a way that’s not easy to manifest, es¬ 
pecially not easy to do it nonviolently. It takes 
ingenuity to show that you feel very strongly 
about something without our, if I can say, our 
usual American or human way of demonstrat¬ 
ing it by showing that you’re willing to hurt 
somebody else and can be hurt in turn. Those 
values [based on violence] are the very values 
that have led us, as I see it, to the point of intro¬ 
ducing a weapon that may end all life, the bet¬ 
ter to threaten with. If we used the same meth¬ 
ods, it seemed to me, we would confirm, we 
would be legitimating that activity. 

So when I heard that there were people here 
who were planning not just, this time, to peti¬ 
tion by writing or in the streets by a demonstra¬ 
tion, but by putting their bodies on the track, I 
thought that needs encouragement, that’s use¬ 
ful, that’s effective, and I want to be part of 
that. So I told them in March, “Use my name, 


67 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


for what that’s worth. I am going to be on the 
tracks with you in your scheduled sitting.” 

Q: Mr. Ellsberg, do you believe in the consti¬ 
tutional right of citizens to petition and demon¬ 
strate for grievances which are being inflicted 
upon them? 

A: I believe that without the actual exer¬ 
cise and protection of that right in the last 10 
years, high explosives and also nuclear weap¬ 
ons would be falling on Vietnam today. 

Without democracy functioning . . . only de¬ 
mocracy could end that war against the will 
of our administration, several administrations. 
And democracy did do that. That’s what I 
thought I was fighting for in the Marine Corps. 

Q: Do you think you and the other defen¬ 
dants exercised their democratic rights as citi¬ 
zens under our constitution? 

A: Yes. 

Q: Do you know of any alternative ways that 
you could have tried to stop the neutron bomb 
production, or if it hasn’t been in production, to 
stop it being produced other than the way that 
you and the other defendants tried to do it? 

A: Yes. I, and I think many of the other de¬ 
fendants—I won’t speak for them—are doing 
dozens of alternative ways. I have been, will 
be, doing everything I can think of. It hasn’t 
worked yet because despite, as we are led to un¬ 
derstand, the President’s personal reservations 
about the bomb, he doesn’t seem yet to have 
found the power to carry out his promise not 
to add more weapons to our stockpile. We’re 
on those tracks to help him get that power. We 
are trying to give him the power to do what he 
had told us he wants to do: turn the arms race 
in the other direction. Go down rather than up, 
which is what is actually happening. 

We are there with the understanding, by the 


way, that we had the unusual advantage of hav¬ 
ing the President on our side. And yet that ad¬ 
vantage didn’t seem as powerful as one would 
think, because the bomb is being built. Well, 
that didn’t surprise me. My 15 years in the ex¬ 
ecutive branch, including the Marine Corps, 
had shown me that wasn’t a surprise; the Pres¬ 
ident is just one person, very powerful, more 
than others, but not necessarily enough to do 
what he thinks right unless he has support. Our 
system gives him the chance to get that support 
from us if he does it. That’s what we are doing. 

Q: This means a lot to you, doesn’t it, Mr. 
Ellsberg? 

A: It’s my life. 

Q: You’re getting no material things for this, 
no profits of any kind, are you? 

A: All my—virtually all my lecturing income 
for the last two years has gone to the Mobili¬ 
zation for Survival, which is a coalition of anti¬ 
war and anti-nuclear groups of which the cur¬ 
rent Truth Force and the Action Group are part, 
and I am one of their main fundraisers. But the 
money then goes to them, not to me. 

Q: Mr. Ellsberg, let me depart from what we 
have been trying to deal with now, mainly, what 
was in your mind, what motivated you to come 
here and so forth. Let’s talk about the facts and 
circumstances that you found when you did 
come here. When did you come, first? Now, you 
told us your great anxiety, your fear or concern 
about the neutron bomb, knowing that it was 
being or might be manufactured or produced 
here. When did you come to Rocky Flats or to 
Colorado? 

A: Well, I used to come to Colorado in the 
summers all the time. My mother and father 
grew up here. I feel very close to Colorado. 

Q: Do you have family that live in Colorado? 


68 


A CRITICALITY 

A: Most of my living relatives are from Col¬ 
orado. 

Q: Do you feel the Rocky Flats Plant is a dan¬ 
ger to your relatives? 

A: I feel it’s a danger to everyone in the world. 
But even the process of producing weapons is, 
of course, a danger to all the people here and 
to, frankly, my relatives. It may sound odd, my 
relatives are grown up, they are older people. 
What really strikes me very much is that this is 
a state that I feel very much part of and it’s be¬ 
ing poisoned by what’s happening right now. 

Q: Are you familiar with studies of terrible 
effects of radiation upon human beings? 

MR. CANTRELL: Your Honor, let’s let Mr. 
Ellsberg testify as he has alone so ably up to 
now and not Mr. Sherman. 

THE COURT: Objection sustained. Please 
rephrase that. 

Q: (By Mr. Sherman) Is it your belief, or was 
it your belief when you were arrested the first 
time or just before you were arrested, that the 
Rocky Flats Plant was a danger to the health of 
the inhabitants of the state? 

MR. CANTRELL: Your Honor, it’s the same 
way— 

Mr. Sherman, if I may just have a minute here. 

I can’t object to a question if he is going to 
give the statement prior to being asked. 

THE COURT: Try not to lead the witness. 

MR SHERMAN: Well, it’s a very specific 
question, Your Honor. 

Q: (By Mr. Sherman) Do you believe, or in 
your mind did you feel that there was any dan¬ 
ger to the health of people around the plant? 

MR. CANTRELL: Your Honor- 

Just ask him what he feels about the plant 
without leading him into specific areas of what 
Mr. Sherman is— 


OF CONSCIENCE 

MR. SHERMAN: But this relates to what 
he did, Your Honor. He protested. He peti¬ 
tioned. He went out on the grounds. He went 
on the tracks and so on. Why? The jury wants 
to know why. I am not asking him as an ex¬ 
pert, though I do think he would qualify as 
an expert. I am asking him whether or not the 
fact, if he believes it, that the plant is danger¬ 
ous to health—the health. 

THE COURT: Let’s find out, Mr. Sherman, 
what if anything he believes and if that has any¬ 
thing to do with what he was out there for. 

The objection is sustained. 

Q: (By Mr. Sherman) All right. Mr. Ellsberg, 
what did you believe about Rocky Flats? 

A: I believe that it’s a danger, but may I 
qualify that? 

Q: Say what you like; whatever. 

A: Like many other industrial processes deal¬ 
ing with various poisonous or toxic or explo¬ 
sive materials of many kinds, this plant endan¬ 
gers and really sickens and kills people every 
day it operates, and each day it sentences more 
to death. It’s not alone in that: As I understand 
it, many of the industrial processes do the same, 
some on a bigger scale, some less. I have to say 
that, in qualification, the danger [in the produc¬ 
tion process] is great, not minimizing it . . . but 
my background has burdened me with a kind 
of knowledge about the product that this par¬ 
ticular industrial plant produces which gives 
me quite a different perspective of the nature 
of the danger. It produces a dangerous explo¬ 
sive, but the explosion of one [thermonuclear] 
weapon whose core was made at Rocky Flats, 
as an accident falling off a plane on alert—as 
planes were on alert in ’61 for the Laos crisis— 
if that weapon had fallen off a plane in Japan 
it could have released more explosive power 


69 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


than all the bombs and shells in all the wars 
of human history—World War I, World War II, 
Korea, and Vietnam, which had yet to come. 
Beyond that, it would have spread a radioac¬ 
tive cloud which, if the bomb had fallen, let us 
say, in the base where it existed called “Iwaku- 
ni,” would have wiped out Hiroshima, 30 miles 
away, from fallout. 

D.E. Note: On the morning of August 9, 
1978, Nagasaki Day, I revealed in a press 
conference held on the tracks that I had 
discovered and reported to the Office of 
the Secretary of Defense, nearly 20 years 
ago, that the Navy was then storing nu¬ 
clear weapons on a landing ship anchored 
in the tidal waters of Japan, just off the 
Marine air base at Iwakuni, evidently in 
violation of our security treaty with Ja¬ 
pan, possibly without the knowledge of 
U.S. civilian authorities, and at a risk of 
catastrophic accident or sabotage. (This 
press conference, covered in Japan, led 
to questioning in several closed sessions 
of the Diet. The response of the Japanese 
government has been that, since the U.S. 
has never requested permission to land or 
store nuclear weapons in Japan, it is pre¬ 
sumed that none has ever been in Japan.) 

The Truth Force later that day blocked 
the roadway leading to the plant as well 
as the tracks, on the principle that plu¬ 
tonium fission elements of the type that 
had destroyed Nagasaki 33 years before 
should not be manufactured, without 
protest, on the anniversary of that event. 

As Allen Ginsberg and I sat in a police 
car under arrest, Lt. Earl Splenard, an of¬ 
ficer of the Jefferson County Sheriff’s De¬ 


partment who was in charge of the jail, 
remarked to us that he himself had been 
a Marine pilot at Iwakuni in 1959-63, the 
very period I had been discussing. 

“Our bombs,” he said, explaining that 
he was referring to thermonuclear bombs, 
“came in by air.” They were stored ashore. 
They were loaded on the planes only infre¬ 
quently for practice, and during crises, be¬ 
cause of the danger of accidental detona¬ 
tion: a real risk, since they had to be hung 
on the outside of these fighter-bombers. 

Spenard himself had been on alert for 
days “during the Laos crisis in April 1961,” 
with a thermonuclear weapon slung un¬ 
derneath his plane. Allen asked him the 
size of the weapon. “Variable yields, up to 
23 megatons.” 

Twenty-three megatons is the equivalent 
of 23 million tons of TNT. It is over 1,000 
times the explosive power of the bomb 
that destroyed Nagasaki; a Nagasaki-type 
bomb, its fission components manufac¬ 
tured at Rocky Flats, served as its “trigger.” 
For comparison, the United States dropped 
two million tons of high explosives in all 
of World War II; and though few Ameri¬ 
cans are aware of it, we later dropped al¬ 
most four times that, 7.5 million tons, on 
Indochina: But Lt. Spenard, in his plane 
at Iwakuni, had been sitting on the explo¬ 
sive equivalent of three Vietnams—or 12 
World War IIs—in one bomb. And this un¬ 
der President Kennedy, for possible U.S. 
first-use against China, a country that then 
had no nuclear weapons, if conflict had 
arisen within ... Laos! 

The possibility of an accident in Japan 
was no mere hypothesis, even then. Just 


70 


A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


two months earlier, on January 23, 1961, 
a B-52 crashing near its home base in 
North Carolina jettisoned one of its two 
24-megaton bombs, which fell in a field 
near the city of Goldsboro. 

Out of six supposedly independent safe¬ 
ty devices, each capable of preventing acci¬ 
dental detonation, five failed in the fall. A 
single switch (or by another account, two 
of the six) prevented the bomb from ex¬ 
ploding, which would have released near 
Goldsboro explosive force over 1,800 
times greater than the Hiroshima bomb. 

On January 17, 1966, four hydrogen 
bombs were dropped near Polomares, 
Spain, when a B-52 collided with its KC- 
135 tanker during refueling. High-ex¬ 
plosive components detonated on two 
of them, contaminating a wide area with 
radioactivity. 

On January 21,1968, a B-52 attempting 
an emergency landing at Thule Air Force 
Base, Greenland, crashed and burned on 
the ice of North Star Bay. The high-explo¬ 
sive components of all four nuclear weap¬ 
ons aboard detonated, contaminating an 
area half a mile long with plutonium. 

There have been 30 or more such “ma¬ 
jor” nuclear accidents since 1945, or an 
average of one a year since Nagasaki, and 
over 250 “minor” accidents involving nu¬ 
clear weapons. Every one of the weapons 
above had a plutonium core manufac¬ 
tured at Rocky Flats, and every one of the 
three to ten components turned out daily 
at Rocky Flats goes into a weapon which 
adds, individually, to the worldwide po¬ 
tential for such explosions. 

In other words, “Harrisburgs” involving 


nuclear weapons have already occurred, 
by the dozens, some coming as close to a 
nuclear explosion as the Three Mile Island 
reactor came to a core meltdown. The pub¬ 
lic is unaware of these only because, unlike 
reactor accidents, most details are classi¬ 
fied at the time for “national security.” [For 
an extensive listing, and discussion, see the 
Annual Reports of the Stockholm Interna¬ 
tional Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) for 
1967-68 and for 1977.) The fact is that 
American planes in the ‘60s dropped more 
thermonuclear warheads accidentally on 
U.S. and allied territories than the Soviet 
Union had ICBMs in 1961, the year of the 
“missile gap.”] 

... So I am talking about a different order of 
danger. Rocky Flats has contributed to produc¬ 
ing 9,000 such warheads and we have 22,000 
tactical ones as well. 

That’s the danger that brings me to these tracks. 
I learned about the immediate health hazard of 
the processing once I came here, and that is suf¬ 
ficient reason for the people who did not have a 
dozen clearances and don’t have that feeling of in¬ 
volvement that I am forced to have, and they only 
know what they read in the papers. That’s a suf¬ 
ficient reason for them to be protecting their lives 
and the children’s lives from now on from the 
very processing of this stuff. But I am saying that 
the continued production of every weapon that is 
produced there—three to ten a day on the aver¬ 
age, that are being produced there—every one of 
them adds nothing to the deterrence of nuclear 
attack, but rather, (a) adds another weapon that 
can fall off, as weapons have fallen in North Car¬ 
olina, in Montana, in South Carolina, in Green¬ 
land, fallen on the ground with the possibility of 


71 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


a total explosion, (b) adds to the possibility of un¬ 
authorized action, a delegation having been giv¬ 
en, a delegation of which Jimmy Carter may at 
the moment still be unaware—some lieutenant 
may with the best intentions believe he is autho¬ 
rized to go with that weapon, (c) adds to the pos¬ 
sibility of use [directed by the President] against a 
country that doesn’t have nuclear weapons, and 
(d) above all, as I say, adds to the risk of start¬ 
ing an era of nuclear wars that ends by triggering, 
by detonating all of the weapons. Russian weap¬ 
ons, our weapons, and ending life on this earth. 
That’s why I came here. That’s why I am spend¬ 
ing all of my time, that’s why I am spending the 
rest of my life to do what I can to educate peo¬ 
ple in the one country in the world that has the 
best chance of acting on that information, even 
when their government lies to them, even when 
their government disagrees with them. This is the 
one country—that I am lucky enough to live in, 
and we all are—where the people, if they under¬ 
stand what the risks are, have the widest scope to 
change their own lives, to abandon business as 
usual, to take a risk with an effect, the effect of 
alerting other people who can vote, who can lob¬ 
by, who can campaign. And save us. 

Q: I think we understand your attitudes very 
well, Mr. Ellsberg. You were arrested how many 
times when you came here? 

A: Four. 

Q: And the first time you were arrested, when 
was that and the circumstances of that arrest? 
Where were you and what was it all about? 

A: It was Friday morning, May 5.1 had been 
on the tracks since the scheduled sit-in of April 
29. Do you want what led up to that? 

Q: Yes, up to the time of that first arrest with 
respect to yourself and the other defendants. 

A: What had been scheduled and what I joined 


was a sit-in which was on the posters and which 
it was announced that I would join. And I un¬ 
derstood from the members of the Action Group 
and from newspapers that the Rockwell Corpo¬ 
ration did consent to or was permitting the first 
night, not to later, but the first night which was 
what I was joining, it was announced there would 
be this. And I announced that I would propose 
that we stay more than one night, that it would 
be a stronger witness not to have just one night. 
My own experience, by the way, from the past, 
was that effectiveness of these measures in com¬ 
municating what needed to be communicated— 
our own sense of urgency, our own determina¬ 
tion, and the suggestion to other people that they 
had it in themselves to do something similar, to 
invent things that would be similarly useful—that 
depended very much on what effort you went to. 

A walk in the sun on a Saturday afternoon 
didn’t impress people very much. I once stood 
next to Mr. McNamara in the Pentagon and 
watched a march on the Pentagon [Novem¬ 
ber 1967]. He didn’t seem too impressed; the 
weather was too nice. 

I thought one night on the tracks, which was 
what was scheduled and which Rockwell con¬ 
sented to, is good but we can do better if peo¬ 
ple are willing, and I was going to propose that 
we stay longer. That, however, was going to be 
up to consensus decision-making. There was 
no set time ever announced for how long we 
would stay, it would be at least one night. So 
I said, I’m going to bring it up for discussion. 
And on the next morning, of course, after this 
night of amazing rain and sleet and very fierce 
rain, I was amazed, there were still 65 people 
there when we counted heads in the morning. I 
thought there was going to be a handful. I was 
impressed, and to that group I said, let’s stay. 


72 


A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


D.E. Note: I had a feeling, after that 
first night, that these were people I was 
especially ready to face jail with. The 
feeling grew and it was shared. The first 
week’s weather was our good luck, a gift 
to our action in many ways. Not least, it 
revealed us to each other, all those who 
remained after the first few days, as peo¬ 
ple we could depend on, as individuals 
with remarkable, intuitive commitments 
to nonviolence, who could be trusted to 
maintain that discipline, as others with a 
concern about nuclear weapons and war¬ 
fare as deep and urgent as one’s own. One 
sleet-drenched day under the plastic shel¬ 
ter on the tracks, as we went around the 
circle telling the group about ourselves 
and what had brought us here, these per¬ 
ceptions came through to me so strong¬ 
ly, with so strong a sense that I found my 
way home to a family, that I spent most of 
the day crying, my face in my hands, as I 
listened to each story in turn. 

I began to notice one repeated theme, 
usually mentioned without any emphasis. 
One after another remarked, in passing, 
that the upbringing or the instinct binding 
them to nonviolence had set them apart 
uncomfortably from others—neighbors 
and friends—in recent years, in some cas¬ 
es since childhood. It was something some 
had come to hide in themselves, and not 
to expect to find or share; others, with¬ 
out feeling they were concealing anything, 
had found themselves estranged from pol¬ 
itics. I knew very well that my own com¬ 
mitment from ’68 on, the influence on me 
of the War Resisters League, of the writ¬ 
ings of Gandhi and King, Barbara Dem- 


ing and Joan Bondurant, I had not talk¬ 
ed about very much in recent years, even 
within the antiwar movement. 

When it came my turn to speak, I point¬ 
ed out that this group, gathered together in 
this outlaw tent from all parts of the coun¬ 
try, shared common values to an amazing 
degree. They were not values, it seemed, 
we felt willing to prescribe for others, in 
other struggles, especially in other coun¬ 
tries; yet I suggested, with a feeling of bold¬ 
ness, we make those values fully open in 
our own action, part of our message. “The 
truth about us is”—I found it hard to say 
this, hard to keep from crying at the relief 
of pushing off a burden of inhibition half 
a dozen years old—“we are nonviolent. 
That’s who we really are. Why don’t we 
come out of the closet at last, and say so?” 
It may sound odd that this felt hard to say; 
but we lived in a country that had come 
to believe, a decade ago, that the methods 
of Martin Luther King had been somehow 
“discredited.” 

I don’t have the impression this propos¬ 
al had specific effect; the group did not re¬ 
ally seem to need much encouragement in 
this direction. 

When we were urged by the Rocky 
Llats Action Group, which had organized 
the legal rally, to choose a separate, dis¬ 
tinguishing name for our action, someone 
(not I) came up with Rocky Llats “Satya- 
graha,” the term Gandhi invented for his 
nonviolent campaigns (precisely to avoid 
the implications of “passive” resistance). 
The group agreed, then found it too exot¬ 
ic; they chose its literal translation, Rocky 
Llats Truth Lorce. 


73 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


I said in particular, that the President ... is 
this month, as he was last month, and maybe 
next month, deciding on the neutron bomb that 
will be made right here. He was coming in this 
area [in the next few days] to the area of Gold¬ 
en. This was crucial in my mind at the moment; 
he should visit, in my opinion, Rocky Flats, the 
plant, he should hear their story, he should see 
what is being done under him as Commander- 
In-Chief, and he can visit us. I think I mainly 
mentioned this on Monday or Tuesday, saying, 
if we are here, we can bring him to the scene of 
the crime. We will be here where the damage is 
being done day by day. Let him hear both sides, 
we will be here instead of our having to go there, 
he’s coming to us, but if we are not here it won’t 
happen, so I urged them to stay. 

Q: When you used the word “crime,” you are 
referring to the production of the plant? 

A: I am saying the criminal negligence in¬ 
volved, as I see it, in spraying the State of Col¬ 
orado and other states with radioactive poison 
that will last a half a million years, but I am 
talking about, above all, what I believe to be 
the crime against humanity that is involved in 
fashioning a machinery, which is happening at 
Rocky Flats, to end all life on earth. And I think 
that’s a crime against humanity. 

So I said, he’s implicated. He’s against it from 
what we know. Let’s let him know that there 
are some people here—maybe we are the only 
people outside of Georgia (and that’s not a joke, 
because the backgrounders on which my think¬ 
ing was based said that the people against the 
weapon in the administration were simply, in 
my understanding, Carter, Hamilton Jordan, 
Jody Powell, and Andrew Young, all his closest 
friends from Georgia; but my own colleagues 
from the Defense Department who had done the 


bombing of Vietnam, Vance, Brown, Brzezinski, 
were all for it)—let’s let him know that there are 
people who feel this is urgent and he should per¬ 
sist in his current position, he should not move 
from it. So we should stay if they’ll let us. 

And they let us. They told us, in fact, as I un¬ 
derstood it, that we could stay as long as we 
liked because they didn’t use that track. My son 
phoned me from New York when I finally got 
off the tracks and said, “Why are you on this 
spur? It’s unused.” He heard this on the radio. 
Well, I thought that was a lie. I thought Rock¬ 
well wasn’t telling us the truth. I thought they 
did use that track, and that proved to be the case. 

Q: They told the people that it was not be¬ 
ing used? 

A: Someone did. It was reported in the pa¬ 
pers— 

MR. CANTRELL: Objection to what has 
been reported in the papers. 

THE WITNESS: Well, that was, by the way, 
because in the interim it was used— 

THE COURT: Dr. Ellsberg, if there has been 
an objection, please wait until the Court rules 
on it. 

The objection is sustained. 

Q: (By Mr. Sherman) Dr. Ellsberg—Mr. Ells¬ 
berg, or Dan, when you first got there on April 
the 29th, were you present at the demonstration? 

A: Yes, I spoke at it. 

Q: Did you speak at the demonstration? 

A: Yes. 

Q: Did you speak thereafter to other members 
who were there or to any of the defendants? 

A: Are you talking about the night of April 
29th? My speech ended with picking up a pack 
and going on to the tracks in the ram and we 
didn’t do a lot of speaking. We did a lot of 
shuddering. 


74 


A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


Q: Did you know the relationship between 
these people who were so concerned and were 
trying to express their concern and Rockwell 
International, say, on or before the 29th of 
April? What was their relationship? 

A: Well, yes, I can only say what my under¬ 
standing was, that there was an ongoing ne¬ 
gotiation between the members of the Rocky 
Flats Action Group, the Quakers, the Ameri¬ 
can Friends Service Committee, to make sure 
that the thing which would involve thousands 
of people would be in good order. There was 
great concern that there might be provoca¬ 
teurs among us or informers who would some¬ 
how discredit us with some kind of violence, 
and for that reason great concern that every¬ 
one who was on the tracks should have nonvio¬ 
lence training; and also that Rocky Flats would 
have the fullest understanding of this. So they 
were invited to the training, so they could see 
they didn’t have to overreact and have unnec¬ 
essary fears. 

Q: Well, Mr. Ellsberg, do you feel that you 
were committing an offense, a criminal action, 
when you went out to Rocky Flats and went on 
the land there? 

Is my question a clear question? 

A: It’s clear. I am just—I believe that this was 
the appropriate thing for humans to be do¬ 
ing. I was very moved by the number of people 
who were acting rightly. Very glad to have the 
chance to do it, not alone—I think I wouldn’t 
have done it alone; to do it with people, which 
would be effective, I thought, in preventing a 
crime, preventing a crime from being done. 

Q: Then you felt, indeed, that you were the 
ones preventing the crime rather than commit¬ 
ting the crime; is that correct? 

A: I believe that we all, right here, I believe, 


are immediately endangered by our proximity 
to that plant, and as humans and parents and 
children, endangered along with everybody else 
in the world by what comes out of the plant, 
which it was my profession to study. 

And to stop this process I can well imag¬ 
ine people taking violent measures, but I be¬ 
lieve they would be wrong, wrong because they 
would just confirm the values that legitimated 
that plant. I believe it has to be seen, as the peo¬ 
ple in this courtroom have helped me to see it 
(thought I didn’t need a lot of help at that point 
in my life), that what is happening there is ille¬ 
gitimate. They can protest it; and that is needed 
from us, from you, from everybody, that’s the 
legitimate activity. 

I would say that ours was the most and is the 
most legitimate presence on that territory since 
1952, because nothing has needed doing there 
in that 25 years so much as activities of pro¬ 
testing. We were helping to block a train that 
was poisoning the countryside in order to make 
it possible to threaten and perhaps to use poi¬ 
sons that will end life. I think the people on that 
train will some day wake up to the fact that 
their activity is not wise or legitimate and we 
may have helped to awaken them to that. 

MR. SHERMAN: Thank you, Mr. Ellsberg. 

Cross-examination ? 

CROSS EXAMINATION 

Q: Mr. Ellsberg, it’s your testimony, then that 
you stayed from April 29th until you were ar¬ 
rested on May 5th; is that correct? 

A: Correct. I left the tracks once during that 
period. 

Q: It’s also your testimony that negotiations 
went on between officials from Rockwell and 
the Department of Energy concerning your pres- 


75 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


ence out there from April 29th on for a few days? 

A: So I was told. I have to rely on hearsay. 

Q: Wasn’t it your testimony that during the 
nonviolence training you suggested staying on 
the tracks more than one night? 

A: Yes, I proposed that. 

Q: Wasn’t it also true that on May 5th at 
the time of your arrest you were then asked to 
leave the area of the sit-in on the tracks? 

A: On May 5th we were asked to leave, yes, by 
the representatives of the Rockwell security and 
by the Jefferson County police. 

Q: And the sheriff’s department? 

A: That’s right. 

Q: And you fully understood at that time that 
you were trespassing, at least by the word of 
the sheriff’s officers and Rockwell officials; is 
that correct? 

A: I believe that it was clear that they were 
charging us with that offense, yes. 

Q: Didn’t they also give you 20 minutes or 30 
minutes to leave the site? 

A: Yes. 

Q: Now, you have had four or five days out 
there and you are pressing the issue. Now, on the 
5th, was it your intention to be arrested and push 
it as far as you could until you got arrested? 

A: No. Arrest, it seemed to me, was not es¬ 
sential to the meaning and purpose of our being 
there, as I recall once telling you. 

Q: On May 8th you were also arrested; is 
that not true? 

A: Yes. 

Q: And you also knew at that time that you 
had no permission to be back on the tracks; 
isn’t that correct? 

A: I wasn’t expecting permission from the 
Rockwell Corporation. 

Q: But you knew that permission was denied, 


didn’t you? 

A: The issue scarcely arose. It didn’t occur to 
me that they would give permission if I asked, 
but maybe. I did not ask them. 

Q: You didn’t really care whether you had 
permission then? 

A: My attention was only on what Rockwell 
was doing and not if they gave their permission 
for protesting there. 

Q: My question was whether you cared if you 
had permission to be on the tracks on that oc¬ 
casion? 

A: I am saying it was not an issue—Rock¬ 
well’s permission was not an issue unless they 
would change what they were doing, which I 
hoped they would do. 

Q: In other words, the law in your opinion is 
not an issue? 

A: Rockwell Corporation does not define the 
law. 

Q: I believe the other date of the arrest was 
made on May 25th; is that correct? 

A: Yes. 

Q: And on that date were you not specifically 
told that you were trespassing on property of 
the United States government? 

A: I was told that by Sam Thomas of the se¬ 
curity; but he had also made the statement that 
Rockwell Corporation was part of the United 
States government. I was so incredulous when 
he said that, I had my one exchange with him. I 
said, “The Rockwell Corporation is part of the 
U.S. government?” 

That was the full exchange that I had with 
Sam Thomas; but his judgment of our constitu¬ 
tional rights I took with a grain of salt. 

Q: So of course you didn’t leave until sheriff’s 
officers came? 

A: That’s correct. 


76 


A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


MR. CANTRELL: We have nothing further. 
MR. SHERMAN: That’s all. Thank you, 
Doctor. 

THE COURT: Doctor, you may step down. 
Thank you. 

Whereupon, the witness stepped off the witness 
stand. 

The night of our first arrest, Marian Doub, 
our youngest member at 17, was in tears. She 
had just been on the phone with her parents. 
Her mother felt very strongly that Marian 
should spend the rest of the spring studying for 
her exams at Boulder High; she’d been arrested 
enough for one term. I told Marian that I had a 
daughter just a little older and I knew how her 
mother felt. Anyway, it was important she pro¬ 
tect her relation with her parents and their trust 
in her; there would be lots of opportunities in 
her life to risk arrest. 

Three days later, as we waited in a snowfield, 
within an enclosure of snowblocks we had built 
against the wind, Rockwell finally gave us a 
train to stop. Someone shouted, “It’s coming!” 

We began running and skidding down the 
hillside and across the snow-filled ditch that 
separated our camp from the track. A few hun¬ 
dred yards away, a brown diesel locomotive 
was rolling toward us, pulling several cars, one 
of them a white car with warning signs we later 
came to recognize as marking radioactive car¬ 
go. Butch Wade planted and crossed our flags, 
the American flag and the solar banner, be¬ 
tween the two rails and sat down; Forest Wil¬ 
liams, professor of philosophy at the Universi¬ 
ty of Colorado, knelt beside him. Just in front 
of them, Jay Dillon, from Maine and Seabrook, 
lay across the tracks, placing his head on one 


rail and his legs on the other in a movement 
as practiced as if he had been rehearsing it for 
years. The rest of us crowded on the rails be¬ 
hind the flags and watched the train moving to¬ 
ward us. 

It was an interesting moment. The train was 
moving slowly; but it was not, as we sat there, 
slowing down. No one supposed, of course, 
that the Denver and Rio Grande engineers had 
any desire to run over us. But... had they been 
practicing stopping for people on the track? 
Was there any chance they might be tempted to 
play “chicken,” counting on us to jump aside? 
(More than a few sitting there were determined 
not to do that). 

No one moved—and the train slowed and 
stopped, a healthy distance from us (not all that 
far). Silence. For several moments we sat look¬ 
ing at the locomotive. The locomotive looked 
at us. Then—as noiselessly as the Superposse in 
“Butch Cassidy” erupting in the distance from 
a boxcar—two files of helmeted officers began 
emerging from opposite sides of the cabooses, 
approaching us as if in slow motion through 
the deep snow along the tracks. 

The booking process in the jail took a long 
time. Late in the evening as I was being pho¬ 
tographed, I found myself in a room with two 
women being newly booked in. One of them 
was Marian Doub. 

Marian had not come with us for the sec¬ 
ond occupation; I was surprised to see her. 
After spending the day in her classes at Boul¬ 
der High, she explained, she had seen our ar¬ 
rest on the evening news and learned that the 
track were now unoccupied. So the two of 
them—she nodded toward the other woman 
now being booked—had driven to the tracks 
and found them deserted. In the darkness, car- 


77 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 



rying flashlights, they began walking down the 
tracks toward the plant. They held hands as 
they walked, and sang. 

After a while they saw a light ahead on the 
tracks, growing larger. It was the train, coming 
out from the Rocky Flats plant that same night 
with its cargo of radioactive waste. The train 
came up close to them and stopped. Still sing¬ 
ing, they both sat down in the snow between the 
rails. The two women chose to go limp when a 
policeman on board tried to remove them. He 
requested help and they were arrested. 

It had been a long day. My head was spin¬ 
ning as I listened to Marian’s story. “The two 
of you stopped the train, again? . . . alone?” 
I glanced toward the other woman, whom I 
had not met before, and asked Marian, “Who’s 
your friend?” 

“My mother.” 


Daniel Ellsberg talking with the press from a 
window of the sheriff's bus after being arrested. 


From Nancy Doub’s testimony in court: 

“We went out on the tracks and walked up 
the tracks in the dark, with our flashlights, sing¬ 
ing “We Shall Overcome,” and “We Shall Not 
Be Moved.” 

It was a very moving experience, standing next 
to my daughter. It’s not the usual thing you imag¬ 
ine, for mother/daughter activity. It meant a lot 
to be standing beside my daughter. You know, it 
shouldn’t just be the young people who are wor¬ 
ried about this. It’s not fair to give them that bur¬ 
den. [She begins crying.] So I was glad to be there.” 

From the testimony of Jean Zimmerman, from 
Indiana, who bad brought her two young 


78 






















A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


daughters, Kristi and Lori, with her to visit us 
on the tracks, and came back to be arrested: 

“My children don’t have a very good future 
ahead of them. [She begins crying, recovers.] I 
gave birth to these two children, and I’ve got to 
do everything I can now before it’s too late, be¬ 
cause radiation is irreversible. Once we put it 
in the environment, we can’t take it back. And 
once there’s a nuclear holocaust, we can’t take 
that back either . .. 

Q: You have acknowledged what you felt you 
were doing to the United States government. 
What did you feel the United States govern¬ 
ment was doing to you on May 24th? 

A: I think they’re taking my children’s lives.” 

My own youngest child, Michael Gabriel, was 
three months old when I brought him up on 
the platform at the opening rally of the Mobi¬ 
lization for Survival in San Francisco, Hiroshi¬ 
ma Day 1977. There were about 1,000 people 
there in Golden Gate Park, some of them young¬ 
er than Michael, the rest all movement veterans, 
many friends; I told them I wanted Michael to 
meet the people he would be conspiring with all 
his life. The next time I presented him at an an¬ 
ti-nuclear rally, just two years later in San Fran¬ 
cisco’s Civic Center, it was to a crowd of 30,000. 
The conspiracy is growing, even faster than Mi¬ 
chael and his friends. Fast enough? That there’s 
no knowing. I have been acting in that hope. 

In the spring of 1978,1 had been apart from 
Michael and his mother for a third of his first 
year, campaigning against the neutron bomb. 
We had been warned by Dr. Thomas Mancuso, 
whose studies of the Hanford nuclear workers 
had first revealed their increased cancer rates, 
not to allow Michael near the tracks or the 


plant (“I beg you,” he said on the phone), or 
Patricia either, while she was nursing. 

So we were to be apart, again, for his first birth¬ 
day, May 12. I was particularly concerned that 
I would miss his first steps; every time I called 
home I asked, “He isn’t walking yet, is he?” 

“No,” Patricia reassured me once, “like his 
daddy, he’s still just sitting.” 

My older son, Robert, arrived from New 
York where he edited Dorothy Day’s paper, The 
Catholic Worker, on the evening of May 11. I 
had urged him to take a break from prepara¬ 
tions for the Seabrook occupation to meet the 
people in this action; I was sure they would give 
him a lift. So the next morning we went out on 
the tracks together, with a group from Green¬ 
peace, to celebrate Michael’s birthday. We had 
a red-covered (Michael’s favorite color) cheese 
for a cake, which we sliced on the rail, with a 
single candle, the kind that relights itself when 
the wind blows it out, “like our movement.” 
Shortly, we were arrested. 

As we were driven toward jail on the road 
along the tracks, which Robert was seeing for the 
first time, he remarked: “You know, there should 
have been Germans on the tracks at Auschwitz.” 

We were sitting, handcuffed, next to each 
other in the van, and I was looking forward to 
spending some time together, at last, with my 
23-year-old son. But Robert was kept in a sepa¬ 
rate jail from the rest of us, where he chose to 
fast, for which he was put in an isolation cell 
“for observation.” After trying vainly for some 
days to be put in with him, I filed bond long 
enough to meet some speaking commitments 
out of the state, then came back to Colorado 
and to jail, rescinding my bond. While we were 
in jail, my daughter Mary came out to Rocky 
Flats from college. 


79 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


It was the first time we had all worked to¬ 
gether since we copied the Pentagon Papers; I 
recall one night when Robert, then 13, was run¬ 
ning the Xerox machine. I was collating, and 
Mary, who was 10, was cutting “Top Secret” 
from the top and bottom of each page with 
scissors. That had turned out to be useful work, 
like what we were doing now. 

They were there that night because I expected 
the papers to be released by the Senate almost 
immediately (which didn’t happen) and I expect¬ 
ed to be in jail very shortly, without bail, for the 
rest of my life. I thought I would never have a 
chance to talk to them again outside of prison. I 
wanted them to have seen for themselves that I 
was acting calmly, matter-of-factly, doing some¬ 
thing I thought had to be done even though it 
sent me to jail. I felt that was the last lesson I was 
able to leave them—the burden, and the gift of 
awareness that this was something they might be 
called on to do themselves some day. 

Now Robert was in solitary in the same jail. 
It was 16 days before I saw him again, on May 
27, as we stood in the column of handcuffed 
prisoners to be led to the courthouse for ar¬ 
raignment. Still I was not allowed to stand next 
to him or talk to him. Mary was in the court¬ 
room; she began crying when she saw how 
weak her brother looked. He had passed out 
once some days before, we learned later, and he 
had to leave the courtroom at one point, diz¬ 
zy and nauseated. But he had written a state¬ 
ment the night before in his cell, and when it 
was his turn to speak—just prior to his sentenc¬ 
ing, since he had not contested the charges—he 
read it to the court in a strong voice. He began 
by describing the perspective of the Catholic 
Worker community of which he was part. He 
went on to say this: 


“By sitting on railroad tracks at Rocky Flats— 
one dozen, two dozen, even a hundred people— 
we ourselves may not actually be able to stop 
the production of plutonium triggers there. But 
we are trying to show that we as a people, if we 
wish and if we are determined, have that pow¬ 
er—the power to change ourselves and histo¬ 
ry—we as a people can close Rocky Flats, and 
in fact that is what we must do. We do not deny 
that the goal of worldwide disarmament is a 
complicated one and filled with risks, but it is 
time that we begin accepting the risks of peace¬ 
making as we have for so long lived under the 
risks of war. Closing Rocky Flats would only be 
the beginning of our work. But we believe it is a 
logical beginning, and it is an absolutely neces¬ 
sary place to begin. 

Perhaps I didn’t need to come to Colorado 
to say this—to say that peace will come when 
we will translate our faith into action. I could 
have stayed home and written a letter to my 
congressman. I could have collected signatures 
on a petition. I could be saying all this from the 
comfort and security of my own apartment. 

Instead I am speaking to you now having 
spent 16 days as a guest in your county jail — 
nine days of that time in solitary confinement, 
which is a 6x6 foot concrete cage with no bed, 
chair, light, window, toilet or sink. I speak to 
you after having fasted for 16 days. For 16 days 
I have eaten no food. 

And I am grateful to the court for this. I am 
grateful to the court for allowing me the oppor¬ 
tunity to dramatize in such a small way the life- 
and-death seriousness of the matter that brings 
us here today. 

And now I face a possible year in jail. From 
what has happened this morning I suspect the 
court will not be so severe. Perhaps in the fu- 


80 


A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


ture the stakes will be higher for us. But it is a 
risk I am willing to face. This is not because I 
enjoy jail. I do not enjoy the possibility of be¬ 
ing separated from my friends, my family, and 
those I love; the possibility of being returned to 
my cage, in which I would not want to put any 
person. But I am prepared if this is what must 
be. Because we are living in a dark age, and 
many men and women will have to face greater 
risks than these if we are ever to see any light. 

And I sincerely hope that for you, Judge, as 
for everyone in this courtroom, there is some¬ 
thing, someone, some cause for which you 
would willingly face these risks. For that is 
what makes our lives precious and beautiful. 
Whether we give our lives for freedom, love, 
peace—or money, power and war—we have it 
to give only once. For us, the choice is clear. 

Rocky Flats is the Auschwitz of our time. Be¬ 
hind that barbed wire and those locked doors, 
intelligent, decent family men in their white suits 
and their security badges are implementing the 
technological preparations for the Final Solution 
to the Human Problem. In each bomb prepared 
at Rocky Flats is another Holocaust—perhaps 
for the children of Moscow, Peking, Hanoi— 
those who build them don’t know. 

At one of the German concentration camps—I 
believe it was Dachau—the American troops who 
liberated it forced the townspeople to tour the 
camp—to see the huddled, emaciated survivors, 
the piles of corpses, the ovens that had disposed 
of the dead. And of course they were numbed 
and shocked and they said, “We didn’t know— 
we didn’t know what was in those boxcars—we 
didn’t know what came out of those chimneys. 

We would like to spare the people of this 
county, this state and our country, that kind 
of experience—so we are shouting, we are try¬ 


ing to warn the people what kind of cargo goes 
over those railroad tracks in sealed boxcars and 
is killing and mutilating your unborn children 
by increasing levels of cancer, leukemia and ge¬ 
netic mutation—even if the bombs never go off. 

And we are doing more than that. There 
are people right now who are blocking those 
tracks. There is a group of people—someday 
they will be thanked, now they are jailed—who 
are saying, “Build your bombs, continue your 
business as usual in this death camp—but I’m 
sorry that I must withdraw my consent—you 
will have to do it over our bodies. 

They are saying, no longer should nuclear 
bombs be made in this country without Ameri¬ 
cans being arrested. And when I heard that in 
Colorado there were people who were willing 
to say this and act on it, I had to come here— 
because I knew these were people I wanted to 
know and to join and be with. 

I don’t know what you will do with us—I 
know some face more serious charges. But I 
must say how very happy and proud I am at 
this moment. How proud I am to have had a 
small role in this action. And I thank you for 
listening so patiently and for helping make it 
possible for me to be here today in such beauti¬ 
ful company. Thank you all.” 

As Robert said the last sentences, he turned 
around, away from the judge, to speak to the 
defendants who filled the small courtroom. 
We stood up, though a marshal was tugging 
urgently at my jail pajamas; the judge had 
warned us against demonstrations. We were 
all crying, had been for some time. We had our 
arms around each other; but when my oldest 
son ended we thanked him, and each other, 
with shouts and applause for a long time, and 
the judge cleared the courtroom. 


81 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


CHAPTER FIVE 

I n closing arguments, Steve Cantrell of the 
district attorney’s office made a dramatic 
appeal to the jury by quoting from the writings 
of India’s peace movement leader Mahatma 
Gandhi, in which he said the “civil resistor . . . 
openly and clearly breaks [unjust laws] and 
quietly suffers the penalty for their breach.” 
Cantrell said that similarly, the Flats protest¬ 
ers should be willing to pay for their acts, re¬ 
gardless of the legitimacy of the laws involved. 

Chief defense attorney Edward Sherman 
asked for acquittal, saying the Truth Force mem¬ 
bers acted on behalf of the public when they 
trespassed at Rocky Flats. He also cited consti¬ 
tutional rights to peacefully assemble and, draw¬ 
ing the jurors’ attention to a potential weakness 
in the prosecution’s case, said the protesters had 
been on the tracks with the implied consent of 
the Department of Energy and Rockwell Inter¬ 
national since there had been no arrests between 
the start of the occupation on April 29 and May 
5, the following Friday. 

The jury was sent into deliberation just after 
5 p.m., and was excused shortly past 10 p.m. 
after failing to reach a verdict. Some observers 
felt the lengthy deliberations on what seemed 
an open-and-shut case should be taken as an 
encouraging sign for the defendants. 

Following four more hours of deliberations 
the next morning, however, the jury returned 
verdicts of guilty on the trespassing charge and 
not guilty on the charge of obstructing a public 
passageway. Since the rail spur was not open to 
the public, the jury felt, it could not be consid¬ 
ered a public passageway. 

The slight encouragement offered by the 


lengthy deliberations notwithstanding, the 
guilty verdict did not particularly surprise the 
defendants, nor were they discouraged. After 
the jury was excused, the protesters and their 
supporters embraced and broke into song. Zim¬ 
merman, in tears, said the ten defendants had 
agreed that no matter what the verdict, “We’re 
winning . .. We are on the right track.” 

“Essentially, we won,” said Ellen Klaver. “We 
did what we set out to do. We brought aware¬ 
ness to a lot more people.” 

One juror, Diana Holman, stopped defendant 
Jack Joppa outside the courtroom. “I want you 
to know we sympathize with you,” she said. 
“. . . I feel badly that I have lived here so long 
and was not aware of what was going on. I 
think it was unfortunate that these people had 
to do what they did to draw it to our attention.” 

Jean Herring, another of the jurors, echoed 
similar sentiments in a note to the defendants 
which Ellsberg read at a quiet celebration fol¬ 
lowing the verdicts. She said she wanted “to 
make my personal declaration by commend¬ 
ing the defendants for their motivation and [to] 
support their dedication and cause ... My sup¬ 
port and prayers are with you all.” 

The 11-day trial had attracted coverage by 
the Los Angeles Times and the Washington 
Post, as well as the Soviet news agency, Tass. In 
terms of publicizing the potential dangers of the 
Rocky Flats plant, Ellen Klaver’s assessment of 
the trial as a success was essentially accurate. 

An appeal of the trespassing conviction was 


November 29, 1978 - While the jury deliberated 
the Truth Force held a private meal to celebrate 
a "good action" whatever the outcome. Back 
in the courtroom the 10 defendants all joined 
hands as Judge Goldberger read the verdicts. 


82 





1 


■ 











A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 



filed early in January. The grounds included 
court errors in respect to the choice of evils 
defense and the fact that the Jefferson Coun¬ 
ty court system was without jurisdiction, since 
the plant is on federal property, which is pre¬ 
empted from state criminal law. In October 
1979, the appeal would still be pending. 

On the 30th of November, two days after the 
verdicts were handed 
down, it was announced 
that the Truth Force was 
considering a temporary 
end to its railway occu¬ 
pation. Although some 
members said the move 
would be only a mora¬ 
torium, there was unde¬ 
niable difficulty in find¬ 
ing volunteers willing 
or able to weather the 
coming winter on the 
tracks. Already, the large 
tipi had been blown 
down by gusts of wind 
over 100 miles an hour 
strong. Many of the vet¬ 
eran protesters had been 
restricted by the courts 
from returning to the 
tracks, and some Truth 
Force members felt it was time to try other 
methods of shutting down the plant. 

There was also concern that an unfair burden 
was being placed on the Jefferson County court 
system. “Our complaint is not with Jefferson 
County,” a Truth Force member explained, “It’s 
with Rockwell.” Others, of course, feared ra¬ 
dioactive contamination from spending too 
much time on the Rocky Flats property. More 


factors pointed toward an end to the occupa¬ 
tion as well. Ellsberg, who had drawn media at¬ 
tention like no other protester, could not return 
to the tracks without risking serious legal en¬ 
tanglements, and the pending sale of the Truth 
Force headquarters in Boulder cast doubt on 
the potential availability of support facilities. 

There were, however, several Truth Force 

members who strong¬ 
ly supported the idea 
of continued occupa¬ 
tion. As with almost 
any group that makes 
its decisions by consen¬ 
sus, there was no final 
agreement reached dur¬ 
ing a meeting on the 
subject shortly before 
the end of the trial. 

Evan Freirich, a young 
Boulder man who had 
become a main spokes¬ 
man for the group, said 
later there was a con¬ 
cern that some would 
see an end to the occu¬ 
pation and the guilty 
verdict in the trial as a 
complete defeat of the 
protest against Rocky 
Flats. “The main concern of us all is that we’re 
letting down some people,” he said. “But I don’t 
think it will hurt our effectiveness to take off for 
a couple of months. The occupation is an estab¬ 
lished thing now. If we stop it, it isn’t going to go 
away from people’s minds.” 

Another major demonstration at Rocky Flats 
was already in the works, with a tentative date 
in late April. 


Truth Force defense attorney Edward Sherman. 






A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


PART III 

BACK TO ROCKY FLATS 


85 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


CHAPTER SIX 

O n December 29, as more benefit events 
were being planned and most of the track 
sitters were taking their breather, the ten pro¬ 
testers convicted in November were sentenced 
in Goldberger’s court. Each was given six 
months of unsupervised probation. For nine of 
the group, he delayed the sentences pending the 
outcome of the appeal. Jack Joppa, the tenth 
defendant, told the judge he had elected not to 
join in the appeal. He said the court system was 
“incapable of coping with our rapidly chang¬ 
ing society.” Joppa’s sentence, also six months 
of probation, began immediately. The offense 
of criminal trespass could have carried a maxi¬ 
mum penalty of $600 and six months in jail. 

Other defendants would enter guilty pleas, in 
accordance with agreements they signed, and 
be sentenced on trespassing charges in January. 
They would receive the same six-month pro¬ 
bationary sentence, which would be suspended 
pending appeal. 

After the sentencing of the first group of 
defendants, Judge Goldberger came out from 
his self-imposed silence on the trial. He called 
the experience an “exciting” one, but was dis¬ 
turbed by what he called “the incredible ar¬ 
rogance of the defendants.” Goldberger said 
it bothered him that the protesters thought 
“they are right and there is no possibility of 
other answers.” 

Two persons who had previously signed 
agreements to abide by the verdict in the first 
trial informed Goldberger in January that 
they now wished to be tried before a jury. At 
the time of sentencing of the first group, the 
district attorney’s office had dismissed charg¬ 


es against all protesters yet to be tried for the 
railway occupation because it felt the light 
sentences were tantamount to acquittal. The 
two now requesting a trial would therefore 
have been the only demonstrators left for the 
courts to deal with, except for the fact that 
people kept getting arrested through Decem¬ 
ber, when ten were taken into custody at the 
tracks, and into the spring. Although its mo¬ 
mentum substantially diminished during the 
winter months of 1978 and 1979, the occu¬ 
pation never completely died. 

A pair of protesters, Patrick Malone and 
Kaye Roye, were arrested on the tracks south 
of the plant on January 18. A tipi they had been 
occupying was confiscated as evidence. Fol¬ 
lowing the earlier dismissal of charges against 
the protesters who had not yet been tried, the 
district attorney’s office said it would seek the 
maximum penalty against anyone arrested 
thereafter at Rocky Flats. Malone and Roye 
were held in jail over the weekend, beginning 
Thursday, on $200 bond. But at their arraign¬ 
ment Monday, charges were dropped against 
Malone. The pair’s attorney, Alan Dunn of the 
National Fawyers Guild, said that previous ar¬ 
rests on the tracks had all been made follow¬ 
ing warnings, while no such prior notice was 
given to Malone and Roye. The district attor¬ 
ney’s office agreed to drop the charges against 
Malone on the merits of that argument, but 
Roye, who said she had remained in jail “as a 
prisoner of conscience,” had provoked “nega¬ 
tive feelings” in the district attorney, according 
to Dunn. She was, however, allowed to enter a 
no-contest plea and was sentenced to time al¬ 
ready served in jail. 

By this time, protesters were broadening 
their methods of opposing the plant. While 


86 



A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 



January 18, 1979 - Patrick Malone (left) and 
another protester were arrested and the tipi 
they were occupying on the tracks was confis¬ 
cated as evidence. For a while no shelter stood 
on the tracks but the Truth Force and other anti¬ 
nuclear organizations were far from dormant. 
Extensive plans were being prepared for the 
April 1979 rally that would draw over 15,000 
people and end with 286 being arrested. 

stockholders of Rockwell International at¬ 
tended a meeting in Dallas, anti-nuclear ac¬ 
tivists staged a mock version on the streets 
of downtown Denver. At the real conference, 
Dan Ellsberg, who was allowed to speak to the 
stockholders (because he had purchased over 
ten shares for that very reason), supported a 
proposal offered by Sister Mary Luke Tobin of 
Denver calling for complete and detailed re¬ 


ports to the stockholders on nuclear produc¬ 
tion at the Rocky Flats plant. The motion, pre¬ 
dictably, suffered a sound defeat. 

Events at the plant seemed to have a way of 
keeping people reminded of the protesters’ own 
activities. In late February, a small fire broke 
out in a metal-machine area of the plant, pos¬ 
sibly caused by a spark from a welder’s torch. 
No plutonium was involved and the amount of 
damage was small, but the item was widely dis¬ 
seminated in the area media. 

For the Truth Force, the Boulder Mobiliza¬ 
tion for Survival, the Rocky Flats Action Group 
and other anti-nuclear organizations, the spring 
was a time of planning. Money was still being 
raised through benefits to pay legal expenses, 
but most involved in the movement concentrat¬ 
ed on preparation for the April 1979 protest. 
Training sessions were held on the art of nonvi¬ 
olent civil disobedience, and “walks for peace” 
were held on two weekends in early April to 
draw attention to the plant’s activities. 

Several weeks prior to the event, however, 
plans for the protest were dealt a serious set¬ 
back. When organizers had informed Rock¬ 
well and Department of Energy officials of 
their intent, as they had done with previous 
demonstrations at the plant, the government 
indicated it would not grant permission for 
the protest. The reason given was that the 
protest the year before had resulted in mass 
arrests and lengthy trials. Organizers had 
this time told authorities not only about the 
protest plans, but about a small act of civil 
disobedience planned for the following day. 
Because of that, a Department of Energy 
spokesman said, the government told protest¬ 
ers they could gather on state land adjacent 
to the plant, but not on the plant site itself. 


87 




A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


The decision was met squarely with a law¬ 
suit by the American Civil Liberties Union, 
which contended denial of permission for the 
protest was a violation of the protesters’ con¬ 
stitutional right to peaceful assembly. Depart¬ 
ment of Energy officials requested a meeting 
with the ACLU in an effort to settle the mat¬ 
ter out of court, and on April 13, after con¬ 
sultations with the Justice Department, En¬ 
ergy Secretary James Schlesinger okayed the 
demonstration. Governor Lamm earlier in the 
week sent a telegram to Assistant Energy Sec¬ 
retary Dale Meyers urging a review of the de¬ 
cision not to allow the demonstration. He felt 
it would be “more prudent” to allow the pro¬ 
test because it would inevitably happen with 
or without permission, and a confrontation 
was possible if the Department of Energy tried 
to stop it. Lamm also cited the constitutional 
reasons for allowing the demonstration. 

In an interesting turn of events soon after 
Schlesinger acceded to the protesters’ wish¬ 
es, Jefferson County District Attorney Nolan 
Brown announced that the federal government 
would have to handle the expected 4-5,000 
protesters on its own. Brown said local sher¬ 
iff’s offices wouldn’t be able to help control 
the crowd at the April 28 demonstration, and 
in a letter to Schlesinger, the district attorney 
advised him to have 120 federal officers at the 
site. Sheriff’s officers would respond only to 
reports of felonious activity or life-endanger¬ 
ing situations, Brown said. He additionally ad¬ 
vised Schlesinger that Jefferson County’s jail 
facilities were full to capacity and that other 
plans should be made if housing for demon¬ 
strators would be needed over the weekend. 


Organizers continued making plans through¬ 
out the episode involving denial of permission 
for the protest. Films were shown on the Univer¬ 
sity of Colorado campus and training sessions 
became more frequent as the days before the 
demonstration grew fewer. Plans called for per¬ 
formances by local and nationally known mu¬ 
sicians, and speeches were expected from sev¬ 
eral well-known activists, including, as always, 
Dan Ellsberg. Others were Lorelei Means of the 
American Indian Movement, Dr. Helen Caldi- 
cott, a Harvard Medical School faculty mem¬ 
ber and author of “Nuclear Madness,” Nobel- 
Prize-winning Harvard biologist George Wald, 
Chicago social worker Marian Stamps, Paul 
Bates of the AFL-CIO, Congresswoman Patri¬ 
cia Schroeder, and Episcopalian priest Malcolm 
Boyd, a civil rights activist from Los Angeles. 
Schedules were carefully arranged for the de¬ 
partures of vehicle caravans, bicyclists, joggers 
and marchers from points in Denver and Boul¬ 
der, and food sales for the event were to be co¬ 
ordinated by the Catholic Workers. 

Patrick Malone, in the meantime, was back 
in court, the last protester still facing legal 
problems from arrests on the tracks. His ar¬ 
rest on January 18 was his fifth. Although 
charges had been dropped because there had 
been no prior warning of the arrests of Malo¬ 
ne and Kaye Roye, the district attorney’s of¬ 
fice reversed itself and filed the same charges 
against Malone two days later. Now his law¬ 
yer was busy making arguments for dismiss¬ 
al before Judge Francis Jackson in Jefferson 
County. Jackson threw out three motions for 
dismissal, but took another under advisement 
and set a hearing for late May. 


88 


A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


CHAPTER SEVEN 

O n the morning of Saturday, April 28, al¬ 
most a year to the day since the mass 1978 
protest at the plant, columns of demonstrators 
could be seen walking along the side of Route 
93 from Boulder toward the protest site, which 
was appropriately upwind from the weapons 
plant on the northern edge of the federal tract. 
Cars were already backing up at the protest 
site, as police tried to maintain some organiza¬ 
tion in the parking area. From there, one could 
see a small stage that had been erected for the 
musicians and was now being covered with 
tarps in response to threatening skies. 

Authorities and organizers had anticipated 
over 5,000 persons to show for the event, but 
Colorado State Patrol estimates would place 
the number closer to 15,000 this year. By mid¬ 
afternoon, the scene was reminiscent of a mini- 
Woodstock, with a small sea of anti-nuclear pro¬ 
testers craning their necks for a view of the stage, 
and those on the outer fringe of the assembly un¬ 
able to hear what was being said from the stage 
or to see who was saying it. Lines formed at a 
half-dozen San-o-lets that had been set up at the 
eastern side of the protest site, and children wan¬ 
dered through the crowd holding some of 2,000 
colored balloons that had been released at the 
start of the day’s activities. 

The demonstration Saturday, which featured, 
to the dismay of the 15,000 anti-nuke protest¬ 
ers, a handful of students from Boulder High 
School advocating nuclear power, was the larg¬ 
est of several demonstrations across the coun¬ 
try. It coincided with mass protests in North 
Carolina, Massachusetts, Oklahoma, New 
Mexico and Arkansas. 


Singers Jackson Browne and Bonnie Raitt, 
calling themselves “Auntie Nuke and Uncle 
Sol,” performed anti-nuke songs and old folk 
favorites for the crowd to open the event, and 
later speakers roused the demonstration with 
barbed speeches about the government’s weap¬ 
ons policies and nuclear power. Dan Ellsberg 
drew lengthy applause when he burned a divi¬ 
dend check from Rockwell International, and 
Helen Caldicott, in a comment that would lat- 



April 28, 1979 - Almost a year to the day since 
the first major protest at Rocky Flats, demonstrators 
again gathered en masse at the plant to express 
their very real concern over its location, its purpose 
and nuclear weapons in general. 

Following pages: The day began with a large 
group, led by three Japanese Buddhist monks, 
performing a song against Rocky Flats. 


89 




























A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 



92 











A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


er provoke the wrath of plant workers, called 
operators and policy makers of Rocky Flats 
“murderers.” 

There was no trouble with the authorities on 
Saturday, and by early evening, as the crowd 
was clearing out of the 
area, protest organiz¬ 
ers were busy cleaning 
up the site. Some would 
work late into the eve¬ 
ning on that task, only 
to be back at the plant 
for the civil disobe¬ 
dience the following 
morning. 

On Sunday, Truth 
Force members assem¬ 
bled in the Call to Ac¬ 
tion Building, a former 
school gymnasium on 
Denver’s West Side, for 
a religious service and 
to work out last-minute 
details of the civil dis¬ 
obedience. They would 
travel to Rocky Flats 
in two groups, one of 
which was to occupy 
the eastern access road 
of the plant. The other 
group would meet near 
the junction of Route 
93 and Route 72 and 
split into two parts, one to occupy the rail spur 
and one to occupy the main access road on the 
west side of the plant, where most of the me¬ 
dia representatives had gathered to observe the 
event. As this third group marched in file from 
the intersection of the two highways to the ac¬ 


cess road, a distance of about a mile, report¬ 
ers and cameramen walked alongside or raced 
back and forth from the front of the line to the 
rear on motorcycles, taking photographs and 
feeling largely the same anticipation felt by the 

activists themselves. 

By the time they had 
reached the main ac¬ 
cess road and assem¬ 
bled across the high¬ 
way to prepare for the 
occupation, news came 
that 48 arrests had al¬ 
ready been made at the 
eastern access road. 
The crowd cheered. 
Fifty federal marshals 
and Rockwell security 
personnel milled about 
the main access road 
waiting for the protest¬ 
ers to come over. They 
had painted a white 
line across the pave¬ 
ment, and Sam Thom¬ 
as, director of plant 
protection, told dem¬ 
onstrators through 
a bullhorn that they 
would be arrested if 
they crossed the line. 
This of course, was 
the idea, and protest¬ 
ers proceeded to march in groups of ten onto 
the property, where they sat and joined hands, 
singing their repertoire of anti-nuke tunes. 
Guards immediately began the task of carrying 
the protesters to the police buses, where they 
were photographed for identification purposes. 



Personal forms of protest were a common sight. 
One man wore strands of charms around his 
neck against the evil at Rocky Flats, while a 
woman from Kansas (opposite) proclaimed her 
own personal patriotism and wondered what 
was wrong with the federal government. 


93 








CONVERT 














FIATS 


m 

'.'A 











w % 


t* t f. 

. 

: . 


f? «gh| 


' v.’V* * 

1 | v*« 

v, jl % " # 

S* I w % 

* * % 


* I 
, # 

U 


% % > 




















A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 



Several times, news photographers and report- tables. He added, though, that the protest had 
ers were restrained after wandering too close been “good in that it keeps you on your toes— 
to the buses, which were parked on the access we all tend to get a little complacent.” 


road nearer the plant. A 
photographer employed 
by Rockwell, mean¬ 
while, filmed the entire 
event from his perch in 
a cherry picker. 

It took over two 
hours for the authori¬ 
ties to arrest all those 
at the west access road, 
a group of about 150, 
and by the time the task 
was done, security offi¬ 
cers were clearly weary 
of carrying limp bodies. 

Each bus, as it departed 
the plant bound for the 
Federal Center in Lake- 
wood, a Denver suburb, 
drew cheers from the 
remaining protesters. 

Those inside the buses 
hung out the windows 
singing or shouting slo¬ 
gans. The plant’s in¬ 
formation director, Fe¬ 
lix Owen, watched the 
activity while talking 
through walkie-talkies 
to plant personnel and 
federal marshals at the 
other occupation sites. 

He told reporters the 

protest would probably have “very little” effect times asked by guards to keep out of the way, 

on the plant’s operations, since weapons pol- as were other still photographers. 

icies are decided in Congress or at the treaty Among those in the final group were Ellsberg 


Previous pages: From folk singers Bonnie Raitt and 
Jackson Browne, to scientific luminaries Dr. Helen 
Caldicott of Harvard Medical School and Nobel 
Peace Prize recipient Harvard biologist George 
Wald (both with Ellsberg), the spring 1979 dem¬ 
onstration attracted big names. 

Then the event turned from a symbolic gathering 
to a serious action as hundreds of protesters pre¬ 
pared to perform civil disobedience. Opposite: A 
final kiss of support as the initialed gloved hand of 
a Department of Energy official taps the shoulder 
of a protestor demanding he leave or be arrested. 


The last arrests of the 
day took place on the 
rail spur. After finish¬ 
ing up with the group 
at the west access road, 
federal marshals rode 
in trucks down to the 
rail spur at the south 
end of the property 
and began readying to 
take the demonstrators 
there into custody. The 
protesters had been 
waiting for some time. 
They sat alongside the 
tracks in the sun, eat¬ 
ing, talking or singing 
while the other arrests 
were happening, but 
once the authorities 
showed up at the rail¬ 
way line, they clam¬ 
bered onto the tracks. 

By now, even mem¬ 
bers of the press were 
ready to call it a day. 
Only a few die-hards, 
out of an initial two to 
three dozen, remained 
to observe the final ar¬ 
rests. A local filmmak¬ 
er shot the entire pro¬ 
cess, and was several 


98 




A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 



99 






A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 



100 





A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


and Patrick Malone, the only protester still fac¬ 
ing trial as a result of previous arrests at the 
plant. Many of the demonstrators on the tracks 
voluntarily walked to 
the buses when asked 
to do so, but sever¬ 
al were carried. Bud¬ 
dhist monks, kneeling 
about 100 yards from 
the tracks, prayed and 
chanted throughout the 
final arrests, continu¬ 
ing as the buses drove 
away toward a gate at 
the plant’s perimeter. El¬ 
len Klaver, who had act¬ 
ed in a support capac¬ 
ity, walked alongside a 
departing bus playing a 
wooden flute. 

Dan Ellsberg was one 
of the last of the 286 
demonstrators to be 
arrested. As he waited 
for the event, he told 
reporters he would 
“trade life in jail for 
the sake of my children 
... We don’t want to go 
to jail—nobody wants 
to go to jail—but we 
don’t believe nuclear 
weapons should be made in this country, and 
we’ll obstruct it with our bodies, our minds, 
our voices—with everything we have.” 


Many of the 120 officers who took part in 
the arrests had been allowed to go home after 
the long day. Those remaining loaded the last 

few protesters into the 
buses and were thank¬ 
ful that they were get¬ 
ting overtime pay. 

Ellsberg had one last 
comment for the media 
before he was placed 
in the bus, a statement 
which summed up the 
aims of the demon¬ 
strators and allowed 
observers to judge for 
themselves the suc¬ 
cess of the day’s ef¬ 
fort. “There are a lot 
more people going to 
jail with us each time,” 
he said, “and there will 
be more and more ev¬ 
ery time until this plant 
changes.” 

The number of pro¬ 
testers that day was 
well over ten times 
greater than the num¬ 
ber arrested during 
the April 1978 dem¬ 
onstration, and the 
movement, far from 
losing momentum, began to show renewed 
vitality. It seemed a safe bet to take Ellsberg 
at his word. 



Security officers became weary of carrying limp 
bodies as they arrested 286 demonstrators over 
several hours. Opposite: One of the last to be 
arrested in the three occupation areas that day 
was activist Patrick Malone. Seemingly blissful 
in his sixth arrest, Malone would encounter ma¬ 
jor legal problems in the months to come for his 
involvement in the actions against Rocky Flats. 


101 








I * s' 

















A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


EPILOGUE 

D uring the week following the mass arrests at 
Rocky Flats, plant workers began to speak 
out on the demonstration and plans firmed up 
for a pro-nuclear rally to be staged on the same 
site. Even before anti-nuclear groups had gath¬ 
ered for their mass rally and civil disobedience, 
over 700 workers had signed petitions calling 
for a pro-nuclear rally. But the effort had been 
postponed at the request of Colorado Gover¬ 
nor Richard Lamm, who feared a confronta¬ 
tion between the two sides. 

At the April 28, 1979 mass rally, however, 
new life was given to plans for the pro-nucle¬ 
ar demonstration by Dr. Helen Caldicott, who 
called operators and policy makers of Rocky 
Flats “murderers.” A public affairs manager 
for Rockwell told reporters that plant work¬ 
ers had taken her words as a personal insult. 
They felt, like the anti-nuclear groups, that 
nuclear war was insane, but at the same time 
they saw a definite need for its weaponry as 
a deterrent to war. Even many of the anti-nu¬ 
clear activists felt Caldicott had gone too far 
in her attack on the plant, and some worried 
about having lost ground where plant work¬ 
ers were concerned. 

Pro-nuclear sentiment in the area would be 
measured for the first time late in the summer 
when the pro-nuclear demonstration finally 
took place and brought out over 10,000 people. 

Long before that happened, however, 
anti-nuclear forces showed that they had no 
intention of letting up in their own efforts. 
A week to the day after the mass arrest on 
April 29, four more people were taken into 
custody at the plant by U.S. marshals. They 


had participated in a religious service at the 
west gate and had crossed onto Department 
of Energy property as the service ended. Re¬ 
fusing to post bond, they spent four nights 
in the Denver City Jail and were finally ar¬ 
raigned on Thursday, three days after ar¬ 
raignments had begun for the 286 persons 
arrested the previous weekend. 

The day the arraignments were concluded by 
federal magistrates, Jay Dillon was again ar¬ 
rested at the plant after he had attempted to 
block a truck entering the west gate. Of the 
286 arrested in the mass civil disobedience, 
261 had pleaded innocent—refusing the term 
“not guilty”—15 had entered guilty pleas, and 
charges had been dropped against four minors. 
Four other defendants entered no-contest pleas, 
one did not appear for the arraignment and 
was later jailed, and one died in a rafting acci¬ 
dent before his date in court. 

Although virtually all of the protesters 
would eventually pay fines ranging from $50 
to $1,000 dollars for their trespassing con¬ 
victions, they also would put a dent, howev¬ 
er miniscule, in the U.S. government’s pock- 
etbook. The previous year, processing a much 
smaller number of defendants through the Jef¬ 
ferson County court system had cost between 
$100,000 and $120,000. Rockwell spokes¬ 
persons put the cost of personnel and equip¬ 
ment to handle the 1979 demonstration at 
over $45,000, and the cost of legal proceed¬ 
ings in federal courts for those arrested would 
run into the hundreds of thousands. 

The aim of the protesters was obviously not 
to shut down Rocky Flats by bankrupting the 
federal government, but a few were comforted 
to know that the effects of the demonstrations 
were being felt at that level. Other activists, la- 


103 



A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


meriting that the taxpayers were in the long run 
suffering because of the mass demonstrations, 
drew attention to the comparatively phenome¬ 
nal costs of operating the plant itself, and to the 
health costs of residents living near it. 

In discussing the various cost factors involved 
in the demonstrations, Chris Moore, a member of 
the Rocky Flats Action Group, noted in an aside 
that no one expected immediate change to result 
from the protests. He compared anti-nuclear ef- 


; DEMONS. 

CY 1976 J ATTEND. 

CD/ 

ARRESTS 

County 

Arrests 


April 

29! 5,000 

0 

Hay 

51 - 

29 


B<- 

21 


8-- 

3 


12,- 

14 


23*- 

18 


24l- 

9 


26{ 150 

0 


27J 200 

0 

June 

14!- 

15 


22J- 

4 


29,- 

4 


301- 

1 

July 

1.3 J - 

7 


27* - 

4 

Aug. 

6; 350 

0 


9; ISO 

78 


24* . 

4 


26; 550 

0 


29, - 

10 

Sept. 

12] - 

2 


19i- 

2 

Oct. 

51 _ 

3 


1 7 , ——_ 

3 


261 - 

2 

Nov. 

2 '- 

3 


9j- 

2 

Dec. 

5;- 

1 


1 2 * _ 

1 


13. t- 

1 


19;- 

1 


I demons . 

; Atl'END. 


Jan. 3 i ~i — 

IS J 4" 

Coont£ Arrests! 


Federal. Arr 


April 28 1 

29 | 

30 i 
Hey 6 J 

10 i 

13 ; 

20 l 
» 

l? I 
1 

6 f 


June 

Aug. 

Sepc. 

Dec. 


; no 

IS, 000-Pro 


30 - 


CD/ 

ARRESTS 


CY 1980 

1 

1 

I 

DEMONS. 
ATTEND. 

~Y~ -- 

j CD/ 

,ARRESTS 

Federal 

Arrests 

t 

1 

Jan. 

1 t 

— 

1 7 

April 

6 ] 

•_ 

1 1 


39 { 

10,000 

» 0 

July 

17 [ 

200 

1 C 

Aug. 

6 j 

150 

1 0 


91 

100 

I 28 


14 j 

— 

1 5 

Oct. 

16 j 

— 

1 7 

Dec. 

15} 

— 

I 3 (AM) 


15. 

— 

same 3 (PM] 


Total ? 

County Arrests: 
Federal Arrests 
CS? Arrests 

i 

I 


3 

307 


! DEMONS. 
! ATTEND. 


cn/ 

ARREST? 


County A r re-sts 


3 

(train 


Total Federal Arrests: 


Jeffco 
arrest, 
person - no 1 
in totals. 


1. Demonstrati 
2 


Attendance: 
CD/ Arrests at RF by 

County Sheriff: 

by CSP: 

by Federal Marshals: 

Total Arrest 


Total County] 
Arrest: 


3 


A court document detailing the number of arrests at Rocky Flats from the 
various demonstrations and civil disobedience actions from 1978 to 1982. 


ernment had failed to show any criminal intent. 
The jury listened. 

The acquittal of Dillon, who had been arrest¬ 
ed seven times at the plant and only a week ear¬ 
lier had been fined $1,000 on one of the charg¬ 
es, sent a wave of hope through the anti-nuclear 
ranks. Leaving the Denver courtroom, he told 
reporters the fact of his acquittal “hasn’t sunk 
in yet, but it feels good.” Dillon could not pos¬ 
itively say whether he would return to the 
plant, but said it was “very 
hard for me to take a vaca¬ 
tion from the issue. I think 
about it all the time, and I 
may want to go back in the 
future.” Then, echoing the 
sentiment of every activist 
involved in the protests thus 
far, he said, “The struggle 
must go on.” 

There was little doubt 
that the struggle would go 
on, into the 1980s and pos¬ 
sibly beyond, but the ques¬ 
tion had now been raised 
as to what form it would 
take. Many protesters who 
had paid $1,000 fines would 


Total County Arrests: 


z 


If 

/?gz- 



tor 
Security 
January 16, 1981 


forts to the American Revolution and to the anti- 
Vietnam war movement. “It starts small,” he said, 
“then keeps growing and growing.” 

Defendants in the summer trials of 1979 got 
an unexpected return on their investment of 
time and commitment on July 16, when Jay Dil¬ 
lon became the first person charged with tres¬ 
passing at the plant to be acquitted. His law¬ 
yer had admitted to the jury in a U.$. District 
Court trial that Dillon had trespassed on De¬ 
partment of Energy property, but said the gov- 


have serious considerations to weigh before ven¬ 
turing again onto the tracks, and some felt the 
uncommonly high fines had been levied in the 
hope that their severity would put a stop to civil 
disobedience at the plant once and for all. But 
with people like Dillon, Patrick Malone and oth¬ 
ers in the movement willing to risk unlimited ar¬ 
rests, that seemed unlikely. Even if mass civil dis¬ 
obedience were stopped, protesters had vowed 
to find other methods, explore other avenues, 
and reach other ears with their message. 


104 











































A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


PART IV 

A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


105 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


BY LEROY MOORE 



LOCAL HAZARD 
GLOBAL THREAT 


|*| hen I arrived in Colorado in 1974 to teach 
f I at the University of Denver, all my teaching 
focused on the fact that we face three threats 
of our own doing that could end human ex¬ 
istence on this planet: a nuclear holocaust, an 
environmental catastrophe, and authoritari¬ 
an governance. At the time I had no idea that 
a few miles away was a nuclear bomb factory 
called Rocky Flats that posed all three threats 
in a very concentrated way. 

I learned about Rocky Flats in 1978 when 
people occupied the railroad tracks leading in 
to the plant in what became the “year of dis¬ 
obedience” celebrated in this book. I aban¬ 
doned the full-time academic world and joined 
them on the tracks. 


By the time I learned about Rocky Flats hun¬ 
dreds of people from all walks of life were en¬ 
gaged in efforts to end production at the plant. 
Less than a decade earlier hardly anyone knew 
that Rocky Flats was a nuclear bomb facto¬ 
ry. This changed after a major fire at the plant 
on Mother’s Day, May 11, 1969. Radiochem¬ 
ist Edward Martell of the National Center for 
Atmospheric Research thought it likely the fire 
had released lethal particles of plutonium that 
could harm the public. He asked Rocky Flats 
officials to sample offsite soil for plutonium. 
When they declined, he and a colleague took 
their own samples. At various locations east of 
the facility they found plutonium in the surface 
soil up to 400 times average background de¬ 
posits from global fallout. 

In February 1970, they shared their findings 
with officials from Rocky Flats and the Colora¬ 
do Department of Health. Plant officials insist¬ 
ed that what they found didn’t come from the 
May 1969 fire. A more likely source was either 
a fire that occurred on September 11, 1957, 
or leaks from thousands of drums of plutoni¬ 
um-laced waste stored outside from 1954 un¬ 
til 1968 in an area later paved over and called 
the 903 Pad. 

After this meeting Martell held a news con¬ 
ference to inform the public not only about 
these earlier events but also about the danger 
posed by plutonium. Anyone, he said, who in¬ 
hales plutonium particles like those released 
from Rocky Flats would be “subject to radia¬ 
tion millions of times more intense than from 
an average naturally occurring radioactive 
dust particle of the same size. . . Only minute 
amounts in the lung are sufficient to cause can¬ 
cer.” His disturbing revelations were news to 
the public but not to officials from Rocky Flats 


106 




A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 



or the Colorado Department of Health. They, 
he pointed out, had long known about the dan¬ 
ger of plutonium in the environment, but they 
had not informed the public. 

THE RISE OF ORGANIZED 
RESISTANCE TO ROCKY FLATS 

Organizing on the Rocky Flats issue began 
in 1974 when Judy Danielson, a Quaker, and 
Pam Solo, a nun from the socially active Sisters 
of Loretto, were hired to share a staff position 
at the Denver office of the American Friends 
Service Committee (AFSC), their focus Rocky 
Flats. They soon had people going door-to-door 
in areas east of Rocky Flats collecting scoops of 
dirt from the yards of residents. They took the 
samples to meetings of people running for of¬ 
fice that year, asking them to get the samples 


Barrels of plutonium-laced waste stored outside 
at Rocky Flats from 1954 to 1968. 


analyzed and to explain what they’d do about 
Rocky Flats if elected. Rocky Flats became an 
issue candidates couldn’t ignore. 

That fall Dick Lamm was elected governor 
and Tim Wirth U.S. Representative for the dis¬ 
trict that included Rocky Flats. They created 
the Lamm-Wirth Task Force and commissioned 
them to study Rocky Flats. The group’s report, 
released in October 1975, concluded that the 
Rocky Flats plant should not have been built 
near a large urban center and recommended that 
the nuclear work done there be phased out or re¬ 
located. This was fodder for foes of Rocky Flats. 

Thus began what by the end of the decade 
blossomed into a national and international 


107 













A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


movement of resistance to nuclear weapons. 
Peace and environmental activists formed the 
Rocky Flats Action Group, an umbrella body 
with eventually 50 to 60 affiliate groups. In 
1978 the Action Group published Local Haz¬ 
ard, Global Threat, a handbook with a title 
that perfectly pegged Rocky Flats. They cas¬ 
tigated the secretive nuclear establishment 
for hiding environmental and public health 
abuses behind the cloak of “national securi¬ 
ty.” Rocky Flats, they insisted, brings not se¬ 
curity but insecurity. 

GAINS AND LOSSES FROM THE 
"YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE" 

In the heady days of the rapidly growing 
movement of resistance, staff from AFSC and 
other groups invited people from all across 
the country to come to Rocky Flats for a big 
rally on Saturday, April 29, 1978. The rally 
would demand that Rocky Flats be convert¬ 
ed from making weapons of mass destruction 
to making something socially useful. T-shirts 
made for the occasion depict a bomb being 
turned into a bus. The rally would be fol¬ 
lowed by an overnight “symbolic blockade” 
of the railroad tracks leading in to the plant, 
the intent being to show that the resisters 
had the numbers to do a real blockade later 
if there was no movement on economic con¬ 
version. Because the blockade was “symbol¬ 
ic,” no arrests would be made. This plan had 
been carefully vetted with management and 
security officials at the plant but also with 
leaders of the production workers union, so 
they would know that no one was trying to 
deprive them of a job. 

All went according to plan until early Sun¬ 
day when organizers of the weekend events ar¬ 


rived at Rocky Flats to learn that 35 individu¬ 
als who’d spent the night on the tracks - Daniel 
Ellsberg of Pentagon Papers fame among them 
- were determined to stay put. Dubbing them¬ 
selves the Rocky Flats Truth Force, they were 
turning a symbolic blockade into a real one. 

The peaceful scenario of the original organiz¬ 
ers quickly degenerated into a shouting match 
between people who opposed Rocky Flats in 
different ways. What was destined to become 
perhaps the longest sustained civil disobedience 
action in U.S. history, one that brought national 
and international attention to Rocky Flats, had 
the serious downside of wrecking any possibil¬ 
ity of making common cause with Rocky Flats 
workers. At the Fernald and Mound nuclear 
weapons plants in Ohio, anti-nuclear activists 
were able to work closely with nuclear workers 
on public health and environmental issues, but 
the possibility of doing this at Rocky Flats was 
ruined for workers who felt betrayed by the oc¬ 
cupation of the tracks. 

FORMS OF ONGOING RESISTANCE 

Despite this credibility loss, the “year of disobe¬ 
dience” upped the ante on the nuclear weapons 
enterprise by making civil disobedience a real 
option at Rocky Flats for many years to come. 

Nine years later, on Nagasaki Day, Sunday, 
August 9, 1987, several hundred were arrested 
for civil disobedience, not at the west-gate main 
entrance to Rocky Flats but at the more con¬ 
taminated east gate. Plant officials forced the 
activists to go there by closing the west gate. 
The turnout was large and arrests were delayed 
because many resisters locked themselves to 
the fence. Radio broadcasts were soon telling 
workers not to come in that day. Though it was 
a Sunday, the plant was then operating seven 


108 


A CRITICALITY 

days each week. This was the only time activists 
succeeded in shutting down the plant for a day. 

There were also many individual acts of civ¬ 
il disobedience, the most notable being that of 
Jennifer Haines, a devout Mennonite who re¬ 
peatedly entered the Rocky Flats site to pray. 
Arrested numerous times, she spent four and a- 
half years in prison, where her health was great¬ 
ly endangered. Her Bread and Water: A Spiritu¬ 
al Journey (1997) narrates her experience. 

Early on Ash Wednesday morning in 1983, 
Sister of Loretto Pat McCormick and Menno¬ 
nite Mary Sprunger-Froese drove to Rocky Flats 
in a car that wouldn’t go into reverse. Reach¬ 
ing the plant they joined the line of cars tak¬ 
ing workers in for the day shift. At the security 
shed they were waved in. After parking by the 
fence of the high security plutonium process¬ 
ing area, they hung crosses on the fence along 
with a banner depicting people from across the 
world, then poured blood on the banner and 
kneeled to pray. After about 15 minutes, Pat, a 
security guard who knew them, spotted them 
and said, “What are you doing here?” Their an¬ 
swer: “We’re commemorating Ash Wednesday.” 
“Oh,” he said, “I forgot to go to mass.” “This 
can be your mass,” Pat told him. She and Mary 
were arrested and carted away. 

Not everyone favored this more confronta¬ 
tional form of direct action with the inevitable 
arrest, trial and possible imprisonment; but, 
in fact, the civil disobedience practiced by the 
Truth Force and others strengthened the polit¬ 
ical middle of the movement. It helped legiti¬ 
mize dozens of other ways of opposing Rocky 
Flats and the nuclear enterprise — writing, 
speaking, theater, marches, music, poetry, lob¬ 
bying, study groups, rallies, as well as educat¬ 
ing the public on the nuclear fuel cycle, radia- 


OF CONSCIENCE 

tion health effects, nuclear winter, deterrence, 
the Non-Proliferation Treaty and more. Activ¬ 
ities like these were going on all the time. For 
ten years Denver Catholic Worker held a vig¬ 
il at Rocky Flats every Sunday. Small groups 
often gathered at the principal entry gate as 
workers entered or left the plant. Alex Mayer 
planted a peace garden across the road from 
the main entrance; often destroyed, the gar¬ 
den was just as often replanted. All these ac¬ 
tions fed into the Nuclear Freeze movement. 
On June 12, 1982, a million people gathered 
in New York’s Central Park to call for an end 
to the nuclear arms race. 

The most beautiful demonstration at Rocky 
Flats itself was the October 15, 1983, encircle¬ 
ment of the plant by about 17,000 people. No 
speeches by famous people, no rock musicians, 
no politicians looking for votes, no trespass or 
civil disobedience, nothing but the sound of the 
wind and birds and, at a given moment, the play¬ 
ing of taps. Beautiful as this event was, I learned 
much later that Ed Martell, who’d blown the 
whistle on the public health danger of Rocky 
Flats, was horrified at the idea of inviting whol¬ 
ly innocent people, especially young women of 
child-bearing age, to mingle where plutonium 
had been deposited in plants and soil. 

At precisely the time of planning for the en¬ 
circlement, six Rocky Flats activists, three men 
and three women, created the Rocky Mountain 
Peace Center in Boulder. Committed to nonvi¬ 
olent action, from the outset the Peace Center 
offered civil disobedience training for any who 
sought it while also encouraging participation 


Following pages: Siri Jodha Khalsa's beautiful 
photo of the October 15, 1983 symbolic and 
actual Encirclement of Rocky Flats. 


109 












A YEAR O' DISOBEDIENCE 


in :ne rud range or activities opposing bomb 
production at Rocky Flats. As tilings reined 
out. arter production ended only half-a-dozen 
years later, the Peace Center persisted as the key 
organization seeking the best possible cleanup 
of the highly contaminated site. 

Denver arrlst Barbara Donachy very effec¬ 
tively addressed the question of how to con¬ 
vey the enormity of the 
nuclear weapons enter¬ 
prise. Her installation 
piece. Amber Waves 
of Grain . produced in 
the mid-1980s, viv¬ 
idly depicted the size 
of the U.S. nuclear ar¬ 
senal with roughly 
25,000 miniature ce¬ 
ramic nose cones. Her 
subsequent Twilights 
Last Gleaming showed 
with ceramic disks 
the vast volume of le¬ 
thal long-lived nuclear 
waste generated by the 
U.S. nuclear weapons 
industry. Both works 
were exhibited in cities 
across the country'. 

An issue to which 
opponents of Rocky Flats devoted much at¬ 
tention was the proposal to extend Highway 
C-470 with a section traversing part of the 
Rocky Flats site, a project deemed likely to 
stir up plutonium-bearing dust. Put to a vote 
in February 1989, it was defeated by a 4-to-l 
margin. But this highway idea has more lives 
than a cat. In April 201 3, it’s alive again as the 
proposed Jefferson Parkway see page 130 . 


CONTRIBUTION OF CARL JOHNSON 

Among scientists whose Rocky Flats-related 
work served the public well, none paid more 
dearly for his contribution than Carl Johnson, 
MD, for several years Director of the Jefferson 
County Health Department where Rocky Flats 
is located. Shortly after he assumed this posi¬ 
tion a Counrv Commissioner asked him wheth¬ 
er a residential develop¬ 
ment proposed for land 
east of the Rocky Flats 
site should be approved. 
To answer this ques¬ 
tion, he and two col¬ 
leagues from U.S. Geo¬ 
logical Survey, probably 
for the first time any¬ 
where, sampled only' re¬ 
spirable dust in the area 
proposed for the devel¬ 
opment. They' found el¬ 
evated levels of pluto¬ 
nium, on average 44 
times what the Colora¬ 
do Health Department 
had found sampling soil 
'not dust) at the same 
locations. Though the 
state had already ap¬ 
proved the project, the 
County Commissioners decided against it when 
they got Johnson’s results. 

He soon proposed that for purposes of as¬ 
sessing health risk in areas off the Rocky Flats 
site the state set a standard based on plutoni¬ 
um in dust on the surface of the soil, because it 
is dust particles, not coarser matter, which can 
be inhaled and is the worst way to be exposed 
to plutonium. Unhappy with this proposal. 



Dr. Carl Johnson, the beleagured Director of the 
Jefferson County Health Department. 


112 


Photo: Robert Del Tredici/The Atomic Photographers Guild 








A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


the state sought the advice of Karl Morgan of 
DOE’s Oak Ridge National Lab. known as the 
“father of health physics” for his work on ra¬ 
diation health effects in the Manhattan Project. 
Morgan sided with Johnson. The state, having 
gotten the advice it sought, rejected it. 

Johnson is best known for a study that 
showed a correspondence between off-site 
areas contaminated with plutonium from 
Rocky Flats and cancer incidence in those 
same areas. The area nearest Rocky Flats had 
16% more cancer than non-contaminated ar¬ 
eas, the far side of Denver 6% more, and the 
intervening area, which included central Den¬ 
ver, 10% more. Published in 1981 in Ambio, 
journal of the Swedish Academy of Sciences, 
the study provided circumstantial evidence 
that excess cancers were caused by Rocky 
Flats plutonium. The study was well known 
within the Rocky Flats resistance movement. 
Unfortunately, shortly before it was pub¬ 
lished, real estate interests gained control 
of the Jefferson County Commissioners and 
forced Johnson out of his job. Both the DOE 
and the Colorado Health Department tried 
unsuccessfully to discredit this report. It re¬ 
mains as a work of integrity. 

WORKER HEALTH 

In 1984 Denver attorney Bruce DeBoskey 
convinced a Colorado Labor Department judge 
that the sole cause of the cancer that killed 
Rocky Flats employee LeRoy Krumback was 
workplace exposure to radiation. The case 
brought national attention to DeBoskey for be¬ 
ing the first attorney anywhere to win a work¬ 
ers’ compensation case on behalf of a nuclear 
weapons worker. He cites four reasons why it 
is so difficult to prove worker claims in court: 


1. DOE and its contractors put huge sums 
into such cases, far more than will be awarded 
if the case is lost. 

2. Most radiation health effects specialists 
who might be called on to testify in court are 
funded by the government. 

3. The DOE controls access to data on work¬ 
ers' health. 

4. If the worker ever smoked, it Mil be used 
against him/her in court. 

Despite these impediments, Deboskey, work¬ 
ing as a pro bono attorney, won several such 
cases while also losing some. An enormous 
contribution he made to the efforts of all of 
us focused on Rocky Flats was to bring Alice 
Stewart to Colorado several times as an expert 
witness. Famous for demonstrating that X-ray¬ 
ing a pregnant woman may harm the fetus and 
result in childhood cancer, she also participated 
in studies of workers at DOE’s Hanford facil¬ 
ity, showing that even very low-dose radiation 
exposure can cause substantial harm. In her vis¬ 
its to Colorado, she was always generous. The 
clarity of her thinking was like a ringing bell. 
But for Bruce DeBoskey, many of us would nev¬ 
er have had the opportunity to meet and learn 
from this truly remarkable woman. 

In 19S~ Gregg S. Wilkinson of DOE's Los 
Alamos Lab published results of an epidemio¬ 
logical study of Rocky Flats workers indicating 
that exposure to plutonium produced adverse 
health effects. His most disturbing finding was 
that some workers with internal plutonium de¬ 
posits as low as 5% of DOE’s purportedly safe 
permissible lifetime body burden developed a 
variety of cancers in excess of what was nor¬ 
mal for workers who had not been exposed. 
His study created a firestorm within DOE. A 
physician on the Los Alamos staff told him that 


113 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


his findings, if true, “would shut down the nu¬ 
clear industry!” His supervisor at Los Alamos 
urged him to modify his findings prior to publi¬ 
cation to please “the customer” - that is, DOE. 
When he published his results without change, 
life was made so difficult for him at Los Alamos 
that he resigned. I learned about this study as 
soon as it appeared. I have yet to meet a Rocky 
Flats production worker who knew about it. 

James Ruttenber of the University of Colo¬ 
rado Health Sciences Center was the lead re¬ 
searcher on a study of 16,000 Rocky Flats 
workers completed in 2003. Sponsored by the 
National Institute for Occupational Safety and 
Health and administered by the Colorado De¬ 
partment of Public Health and Environment 
(CDPHE), the study found higher-than-ex- 
pected rates of lung and brain cancer as well 
as leukemia and other anemias. At a news con¬ 
ference on the day the study was released, Rut¬ 
tenber said the results call into question wheth¬ 
er current standards for permissible radiation 
exposure are sufficiently protective. But Doug 
Benevento, then head of CDPHE, called the re¬ 
sults “reassuring” since they don’t conclusive¬ 
ly prove that the cancer increases came from 
workplace exposure. Thus Colorado’s leading 
public health administrator in effect dismissed 
a central conclusion from years of carefully 
done research that his agency had supported. 

OVERTURES TO THE SOVIET UNION 

As part of the Nuclear Freeze movement, sev¬ 
eral U.S. activists, including Pam Solo of the 
Denver AFSC, traveled to Moscow for talks 
with Soviet officials, actually gaining support 
for the Freeze. They planted seeds later harvest¬ 
ed by Mikhail Gorbachev, who after he became 
premier in 1985 proposed a step-by-step plan 


for abolishing nuclear weapons. When he and 
Ronald Reagan met in Reykjavik, Iceland, in 
1987, they came very close to reaching agree¬ 
ment on nuclear abolition, the chief barrier be¬ 
ing Reagan’s insistence on building the Stra¬ 
tegic Defense Initiative, otherwise known as 
“Star Wars.” 

I myself was in Moscow and Leningrad 
(now Saint Petersburg) in 1985. Though I vis¬ 
ited the semi-official, well-funded Soviet Peace 
Committee in both cities, I went out of my 
way to meet members of the Moscow Trust 
Group, an organization of people who dared 
question the nuclear weapons policies of the 
Soviet government. I began corresponding 
with a few of these people, one result being 
that when I was back in the USSR in 1987 I 
was invited to present a U.S. perspective on 
the nuclear arms race at the first independent 
human rights conference allowed by the Soviet 
government. I was able to attend only because 
I traveled from Helsinki to Moscow with a 
tourist group, and then abandoned them when 
we reached Moscow. 

Participating in this conference meant be¬ 
ing surrounded by incredibly brave people in a 
country where one could pay a very high price 
for beliefs, words, and actions that countered 
the prescribed norm. When I showed up on 
that bitterly cold night at the high-rise apart¬ 
ment building where I would give my talk, KGB 
agents were swarming like flies around the en¬ 
trance, taking pictures and making notes. But 
Gorbachev had ordered them to let this confer¬ 
ence take place, and they followed orders. 

Inside the door of the flat where we were 
meeting, boots were piled high on one side, 
coats on the other. People were cheek to jowl 
in every room. I made my way into the living 


114 


A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


room where in a little while I began my talk by 
saying that Gorbachev was the first leader of 
a superpower to propose a step-by-step plan 
for eliminating all nucle¬ 
ar weapons on the plan¬ 
et. I had hardly finished 
a sentence before a com¬ 
plaining rumble quickly 
escalated into a commu¬ 
nal roar. Lev Timofeyev, 
principal organizer of 
the conference, rose to 
tell those assembled that 
they didn’t have to agree 
with what I said but that 
they should show me the 
courtesy of hearing me 
out. I realized that this 
crowd couldn’t imagine 
that anything even mod¬ 
erately good could emanate from their govern¬ 
ment. Gorbachev, with his vision of glasnost 
(openness) and perestroika (reform), would 
never have reached these people, less from per¬ 
sonal failure than from the insidious effect of 
seven decades of oppression. 

THE 1989 FBI RAID AND 
A FAST FOR VICTIMS OF ROCKY FLATS 

In a monumental surprise, on June 6, 1989, 
the FBI raided Rocky Flats to collect evidence of 
environmental lawbreaking at the plant. Some 
media speculated that maybe those who’d been 
calling the plant unsafe were right all along. 
Soon after the raid, half-a-dozen activists, in¬ 
cluding myself, met with Colorado Governor 
Roy Romer. We told him we knew he lacked 
the legal authority to shut down a federal facil¬ 
ity but urged him to use his considerable mor¬ 


al authority to demand a halt to production at 
the plant until it could be shown to be safe. We 
asked that he do this by the Fourth of July. 


Having left the governor’s office convinced 
he’d do nothing, I decided that if we’d not heard 
from him by July 4, the next day I would initi¬ 
ate a “Fast of solidarity with all victims of Rocky 
Flats” on the lawn of the State Capitol beneath 
Romer’s window. The fast would be water-only 
and would make no demands on Romer, simply 
call attention to his inaction. It would include daily 
meditation and would continue for 35 days until 
August 9, anniversary of the Nagasaki bombing. 
From the start, media provided steady coverage. 
One radio station interviewed me every morn¬ 
ing from the Capitol lawn as people drove to 
work. People supporting the fast and/or curious 
about Rocky Flats came to the Capitol in large 
numbers. Some joined the fast for a few hours 
or a couple of days. My sign-up book has names 
from all but two states and several foreign coun¬ 
tries. Messages came from around the globe. 



LeRoy Moore during his 24-day "Fast of Sadness" on the lawn of the 
Colorado State Capitol - an action which kept Rocky Flats in the news. 


115 





A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 



On the 24th day I broke my fast and turned 
it over to Japanese Buddhist monk Gyoshen 
Sawada whose monastic order exists to keep 
attention on nuclear weapons and other peace 
issues. He continued the fast until August 9. 
Whether production should continue at Rocky 
Flats was in the news every day. 

LIMBO: "TEMPORARY" 
PRODUCTION HALT AT ROCKY FLATS 

On September 21, 1989, plant operator 
Rockwell International stated that they couldn’t 
meet DOE’s production deadlines without 
breaking the law. The next day Energy Secre¬ 
tary James Watkins announced that Rockwell 
would be replaced by EG&G on January 1, 
1990, the only time DOE has terminated a con¬ 
tract before its expiration. On November 13 


Artist Craig Freeman's controversial billboards 
along Highway 93. The bright yellow and ma¬ 
genta installation, funded by Greenpeace, was 
considered an eyesore by some activists, creating 
dissension amongst the ranks. They argued it was 
the right message but the wrong medium. 


Watkins revealed that production at Rocky 
Flats had been “temporarily” halted. 

As if to show how art both mocks and mirrors 
reality, in November 1990 a captivating series of 
anti-nuclear day-glo billboards appeared along 
Highway 93 adjacent to Rocky Flats, each sign 
containing a striking image and part of a mes¬ 
sage conveyed word by word as one drove from 
one sign to the next: “Today we made a 250,000 
year commitment. Rocky Flats is a waste.” The 
work of artist Craig Freeman, the project was 


116 



































A CRITICALITY 

funded by Greenpeace, which for years had a 
Colorado office that focused on Rocky Flats. 

In the months following Watkins’ announce¬ 
ment of a “temporary” halt to production at 
Rocky Flats, DOE stated repeatedly that it 
would resume soon. But every mention of a 
date was matched by a postponement. Resump¬ 
tion of production eventually focused on Build¬ 
ing 371, the largest, newest and most expensive 
of the plutonium processing buildings at Rocky 
Flats, having cost $215 million to build. Opera¬ 
tions began in 1981 but ended in 1984 because 
parts of the facility didn’t work and much of the 
building had been contaminated with plutoni¬ 
um. In its effort to get Rocky Flats back on line, 
in 1990 DOE proposed to rebuild 371 at an es¬ 
timated cost of $500 to $600 million. Activists 
accustomed to direct action suddenly were lob¬ 
bying Congress not to fund this project. Its dele¬ 
tion from DOE’s 1991 budget was, in my view, 
the final nail in the Rocky Flats coffin, though 
the production mission didn’t end until January 
29,1992. By this time, efforts to get Rocky Flats 
back on line had cost $1.6 billion. 

LONG-TERM FALLOUT OF FBI RAID 

As follow-up to the FBI raid, on August 1, 
1989, a Special Rocky Flats Grand Jury was 
convened to review evidence of alleged environ¬ 
mental lawbreaking by plant operator Rockwell 
International. In March 1992, after the jurors 
had been reviewing evidence for two-and-a-half 
years, Judge Sherman Finesilver dismissed them 
because the Department of Justice had reached 
an out-of-court settlement with Rockwell. The 
settlement dropped the major charges against 
the company and sealed all evidence gathered 
in the case in exchange for Rockwell’s plea of 
guilt to relatively minor charges and paying a 


OF CONSCIENCE 

fine of $18.5 million (roughly equal to the bo¬ 
nus it received from DOE for its last year at 
Rocky Flats). 

The grand jurors refused to be dismissed un¬ 
til they completed the report that Finesilver had 
told them he expected from them when they 
were convened. When he received their report, 
he sealed it and warned them that if they re¬ 
vealed anything they’d learned from their pro¬ 
ceedings they’d be charged with a felony of¬ 
fense. On September 30, 1992, Denver weekly 
Westword published a leaked (and abbreviat¬ 
ed) version of the Grand Jury Report. It called 
Rocky Flats “an ongoing criminal enterprise” 
and sought indictment and trial of several high- 
ranking Rockwell and DOE officials. Efforts to 
find out who leaked the report proved unsuc¬ 
cessful. The full report is now available at www. 
constitution.org/jury/gj/rocky_flats/rocky-flats- 
grand-j ury-report.htm. 

That fall a Congressional committee head¬ 
ed by Rep. Howard Wolpe conducted hear¬ 
ings in Washington, the proceedings of which 
were published in a 3,300-page report enti¬ 
tled Environmental Crimes at the Rocky Flats 
Nuclear Weapons Facility. 

A dozen years later, in 2004, Rocky Flats 
Grand Jury foreman Wes McKinley and attor¬ 
ney Carol Balkany published The Ambushed 
Grand Jury: How the Justice Department Cov¬ 
ered Up Government Crimes and How We 
Caught Them Red Handed. This very revealing 
book conveys in detail the drama of the Rocky 
Flats Grand Jury. Two key voices are those of 
former Rocky Flats worker Jacque Brever, who 
blew the whistle on illegal operation of an in¬ 
cinerator burning plutonium-bearing waste, and 
former FBI agent Jon Lipsky, who led the raid on 
Rocky Flats in 1989 and felt betrayed by the Jus- 


117 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


tice Department for letting Rockwell and DOE 
off the hook. The book argues that the real pur¬ 
pose of the FBI raid was not to reveal criminal 
activity at Rocky Flats but to cover it up. By the 
time the book appeared, the Rocky Flats “clean¬ 
up” was nearing completion. The documents re¬ 
viewed by the grand jury and sealed by Judge 
Finesilver would be part of the story. 

PUBLIC HEALTH: DOES IT MAHER 
WHERE ONE LIVES? 

These days there’s a resurgence of interest 
in Rocky Flats, very much due to the publi¬ 
cation in June 2012 of Kristen Iversen’s book 
Full Body Burden: Growing Up in the Nuclear 
Shadow of Rocky Flats. Iversen entwines tales 
of life within a dysfunctional family residing in 
a sort of suburban paradise with her own grad¬ 
ually dawning awareness of what it means to 
live immediately downwind of a dysfunction¬ 
al nuclear weapons plant. Her superbly written 
narrative includes stories of both workers inside 
the Rocky Flats facility and people in her neigh¬ 
borhood who wonder if their cancers and other 
ailments are due to contaminants released from 
the plant. The government, which holds the 
trump card in defining “permissible exposure,” 
says this is only conjecture. Iversen shows why 
the questions won’t go away. Many people who 
never heard of Rocky Flats are learning about it 
for the first time from her book. Thanks largely 
to Iversen, the question whether it’s safe to live 
near Rocky Flats is posed more often now than 
at any time since the 1980s. 

We saw earlier that in 1981 Carl Johnson 
published a study showing a correspondence 
between areas of plutonium contamination 
and cancer incidence within those same ar¬ 
eas. His study indicated that when it comes to 


plutonium released from Rocky Flats, it mat¬ 
ters where you live. 

The largest public-health-related study done 
for Rocky Flats was the DOE-funded nine-year 
dose reconstruction study. The goal was to de¬ 
termine the history of contaminant releases 
and to estimate doses that people offsite may 
have received in order to decide whether fur¬ 
ther study was warranted. The Colorado De¬ 
partment of Public Health and Environment 
(CDPHE) calls the dose reconstruction study 
a “health study,” but it was no such thing. In¬ 
deed, it concluded that an actual health study 
was not warranted. The only situation in which 
a dose reconstruction study would point to 
the need for a direct health study would be 
where there is an indisputable connection be¬ 
tween known releases of a particular contami¬ 
nant and its known physical effects. Plutonium 
released from Rocky Flats can certainly cause 
cancer, but any cancer caused by plutonium can 
also have other causes. The conclusion that fur¬ 
ther study is not warranted is exactly what one 
should expect from a dose reconstruction study. 
It’s an expensive form of false assurance. 

That there’s no need for further health stud¬ 
ies was not the view of everyone. In 1982 Mar- 
tell said that the plutonium in the soil east of 
Rocky Flats “involves risks that are sufficient¬ 
ly serious that only epidemiological studies of 
the next several generations of people living in 
that area can really find out what is going on.” 
In 1996, nurses at the University of Colorado 
Medical Center, including my good friend and 
longtime activist Beverly Fyne, did a commu¬ 
nity needs assessment and concluded that com¬ 
munity-based epidemiological studies should 
occur in areas surrounding Rocky Flats. 

Richard W. Clapp of Boston University ac- 


118 


A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


tually performed an epidemiological study in 
1996. He found excessive incidence of lung 
and bone cancers in areas near Rocky Flats and 
concluded that “the most recent data are indic¬ 
ative of an ongoing health effect and support 
the need for surveillance of the incidence of 
cancer and other diseases on a continuing basis 
in the exposed communities.” 

What Clapp proposed has not taken place. 
Indeed, there has never been any direct health 
study or medical moni¬ 
toring of people who live 
in areas contaminated 
with plutonium released 
from Rocky Flats. Hence, 
no one really knows the 
actual health costs of liv¬ 
ing in such areas. 

A few months after 
the June 1989 FBI raid a 
class-action lawsuit was 
filed on behalf of resi¬ 
dents in an area of about 
30 square miles known 
to be contaminated with 
plutonium released from 
Rocky Flats. They sought 
two things, medical mon¬ 
itoring for people in the 
area and compensation 
for loss of property val¬ 
ues. In 1991 the judge 
disallowed the medical 
monitoring issue, allow¬ 
ing only the property values claim. When the case 
finally went to trial in late 2004, it featured one 
technical specialist after another bearing witness 
to the environmental malfeasance of Dow Chem¬ 
ical and Rockwell International over the nearly 


four decades that they operated the Rocky Flats 
plant. Though the public health issue had been 
excluded from the case, it was the invisible el¬ 
ephant in the room. After nearly four months of 
testimony, the jury found the companies guilty, 
leveling a total judgment against them of $554.6 
million. I mention this not because the case was 
very dramatic, which it was, but because it shows 
that if a group of people mostly unfamiliar with 
the Rocky Flats story are provided with the de¬ 
tails, they will separate 
the wheat from the chaff. 

On appeal the case was 
reversed on procedural 
grounds. Appealed again, 
the Supreme Court re¬ 
manded it back to the 
original court in Denver. 
Whether it will be retried 
is not now known. 

Rocky Flats haunts 
some who, like Kristen 
Iversen, lived in its “nu¬ 
clear shadow” without 
awareness of the dan¬ 
ger. Recently, increased 
numbers who thought 
they inhabited an earth¬ 
ly paradise have learned 
about Rocky Flats and 
have come to wonder if 
physical ailments experi¬ 
enced by themselves and 
others are due to toxins 
released from the facility. There’s no place like 
home, but has home been poisoned by the reck¬ 
less practices of their own government? Spokes¬ 
persons for government agencies say NO, but 
Ed Martell, Carl Johnson, Richard Clapp and 



Kristen Iversen's Full Body Burden is the story of 
growing up next to Rocky Flats. Highly lauded, 
the book won the 2013 Colorado Book Award. 


119 






A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


other independent scientists would say YES. 
Kristen’s sensitive narrative of her own expe¬ 
rience has alerted people and encouraged them 
to share what previously many had borne in 
confusion and isolation. Soon after publication 
of Full Body Burden readers began to write to 
Kristen with stories of how they, like her, had 
lived near Rocky Flats totally oblivious to the 
harm about them, only to get cancers and other 
ailments without knowing why. 

There are tales not only of illness and death 
but also of a sense of betrayal in having bought 
homes in dreamlike settings only to learn later 
that the land on which they live was known to be 
contaminated with plutonium as early as 1970. 
The idea of collecting stories from those who be¬ 
lieve their ailments may be due to exposure to 
toxins released from Rocky Flats is important as 
a counter to the official refusal to do any kind of 
direct health studies of affected populations. 

END OF COLD WAR, YES; 

PEACE DIVIDEND, NO 

The first signal that the Cold War was end¬ 
ing was the decision of Soviet Premier Gor¬ 
bachev not to intervene militarily in Poland af¬ 
ter the Polish people elected a non-Communist 
opposition government in June 1989. This was 
followed by the rapid fall of Communist dic¬ 
tatorships in one Eastern European country af¬ 
ter another, all except Romania, brought down 
by nonviolent means. The Berlin Wall, sym¬ 
bol of the divide between East and West, was 
breached in the fall of 1989. By 1990 the Cold 
War had ended. 

Peace activists and numerous others expected 
the end of the Cold War to produce a “peace 
dividend,” that is, a transfer of funds at last 
from the machinery of war to human needs, 


ending poverty, ending homelessness, support¬ 
ing public education, and cleaning up the en¬ 
vironment. But no, Eisenhower had been right 
to warn about the military-industrial complex. 
Seymour Melman had been right to say we’d 
developed a “permanent war economy.” Still, 
some of us had hopes for change. 

Fueled with this hope, I made two trips to nu¬ 
clear weapons production sites in the former 
Soviet Union, one in 1992, another in 1994. In 
1992 I was one of the first foreigners to visit the 
formerly closed city of Chelyabinsk, near the 
massive Mayak facility where the Soviets both 
produced plutonium in reactors and processed 
it into pits for thermonuclear bombs, like what 
was done at Rocky Flats. Natalia Mironova got 
herself elected to the regional Soviet (parlia¬ 
ment) and then used the platform this provided 
to convene a conference on the environmental 
consequences of nuclear weapons production. I 
was one of about 25 activists from the U.S. to 
participate in this conference. I gave a presenta¬ 
tion on the fateful year of 1957 in which with¬ 
in less than one month a catastrophic accident 
occurred at a bomb production facility in each 
of the only countries that then possessed nucle¬ 
ar weapons. First was the September 11 fire at 
Rocky Flats that sent plutonium particles across 
the whole Denver metro area; second, the Sep¬ 
tember 29 explosion of a nuclear waste storage 
tank at Mayak, requiring evacuation of a large 
area and removal of land from agricultural pro¬ 
duction for a decade; third, the October 8 reac¬ 
tor meltdown at Britain’s Windscale (now called 
Sellafield) facility, resulting in tons of milk be¬ 
ing dumped into the Irish Sea. The one common 
thread is that all three governments withheld the 
truth from affected populations. 

In 1994 I went to Nizhny Novgorod (for- 


120 


A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


merly called Gorky), the closest city to the 
Arzamas 16 bomb-design lab, the Soviet Los 
Alamos. Arzamas was home base for Andrei 
Sakharov before he advocated for nuclear ab¬ 
olition and was placed under house arrest in 
Gorky. In the lovely city of Nizhny Novgorod, 
on the banks of the Volga River, the 20 or so of 
us from the U.S. met with our Russian coun¬ 
terparts. The hope of all of us was to see the 
“peace dividend” in both our countries used to 
turn bomb design labs into centers for social¬ 
ly useful technology, such as sustainable ener¬ 
gy. I was very impressed by the Russian scien¬ 
tists, who were refreshingly open and willing 
to explore even moral questions of the nuclear 
enterprise, quite unlike most of their counter¬ 
parts who I have encountered in the U.S. I re¬ 
alized that open discussion was a new expe¬ 
rience to them. Maybe they, maybe all of us, 
were naive in hoping we could take advantage 
of the Cold War’s end to rein in an industry 
that is as socially and politically destructive as 
its products are physically destructive. 

CHANGE OF MISSION: 

FROM PRODUCTION TO CLEANUP 

In January 1993 DOE Secretary Watkins an¬ 
nounced a change in the mission for Rocky Flats 
from production to cleanup. Though this paral¬ 
leled the collapse of the Soviet Union and the 
end of the Cold War, the roots of the change, as 
we have seen, were internal to DOE and Rocky 
Flats. Most of the many organizations and large 
numbers of people who since the late 1970s had 
worked to end production at Rocky Flats re¬ 
sponded by abandoning the Rocky Flats issue. 
But the really hard work was just beginning. Sit¬ 
ting on the tracks was a lot more fun than sitting 
at the table with your adversary. 


In 1994 the Rocky Flats Future Site Use 
Working Group was created and given one 
task: tell DOE what the public wants for 
the future at Rocky Flats. In June 1995 this 
broadly representative DOE-funded body, of 
which I was a member, recommended by con¬ 
sensus that the Rocky Flats site be cleaned to 
the maximum extent possible with existing 
technology, with the ultimate goal of clean¬ 
up to average background level when it be¬ 
comes technologically and fiscally possible 
to do this in an environmentally responsi¬ 
ble manner. Promptly signed onto by the 
two then-existing oversight groups, the Cit¬ 
izens Advisory Board and the Rocky Flats 
Local Impacts Initiative, as well as by oth¬ 
er groups and individuals, this quickly be¬ 
came the most widely supported public rec¬ 
ommendation ever made regarding cleanup 
at Rocky Flats. By implication, Rocky Flats 
would become a living laboratory for how 
to clean a plutonium contaminated site. This 
proposal stands out as truly conservative for 
recognizing that people of the present have 
an obligation to protect the unknowing peo¬ 
ple of the distant future. 

DOE and the cleanup regulators — EPA and 
CDPFiE — never formally responded to this 
recommendation. At one of the long weekend 
meetings that happened in the decade devoted 
to the cleanup, an EPA technical specialist from 
a distant lab took me aside. He told me he’d 
been to numerous other DOE sites. Typically, 
he said, EPA and state health officials work 
closely with the public so they can address the 
DOE with a common voice. But here at Rocky 
Flats, he said, the regulators work closely with 
the DOE so they can address the public with a 
common voice. 


121 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


BEGINNING THE CLEANUP: 

OFF ON A WRONG FOOT 

Being involved in the intense public partici¬ 
pation process of trying to get the best possible 
cleanup at the Rocky Flats site meant to some 
extent having to learn the language of radio¬ 
activity. The same goes for anyone who wants 
to understand what was and continues to be at 
stake. Hence we would learn about curies and 
subdivisions thereof. One curie is the quantity 
of any radioactive material that undergoes ra¬ 
dioactive decay at the rate of 37 billion disin¬ 
tegrations per second, which obviously is a lot 
of radioactivity. The subdivision of a curie most 
encountered with regard to cleanup at Rocky 
Flats is a picocurie. One picocurie is 1/trillionth 
of a curie. Plutonium in the environment at 
Rocky Flats is most commonly measured in 
picocuries. 

In 1996, DOE and the regulators (EPA and 
CDPHE), with scant public input, set the legal¬ 
ly binding cleanup standard or soil action level 
for plutonium in soil at Rocky Flats at 651 pi¬ 
cocuries per gram of soil (pCi/g). It’s called an 
“action level” because, if the plutonium in soil 
exceeds the specified level, an action - such as 
full or partial removal - is triggered. It’s a clean¬ 
up standard because the soil must be cleaned at 
least to the action level. 

How we learned about this 651 action level 
is a story in itself. It was a Saturday morning 
in July 1996. I was about to leave my house 
for a public meeting with A1 Aim, Assistant Sec¬ 
retary of Energy in charge of cleanup at DOE 
sites, when I spotted in the newspaper a brief 
notice that DOE and the regulators had agreed 
on cleanup standards for Rocky Flats. The ar¬ 
ticle said no more. 

When I got to the meeting place I looked 


up the man presiding and told him that before 
we heard anything from Mr. Aim those attend¬ 
ing needed to know what had been decided 
about the cleanup. He demurred but I insisted. 
So the meeting began with some official telling 
us that the newly adopted cleanup standard 
for plutonium in soil at Rocky Flats was 651 
pCi/g. The room exploded, with Mr. Aim look¬ 
ing on. Jesse Roberson, the new DOE manager 
of Rocky Flats and later Secretary of Energy, 
burst into tears. 

Why were people so upset? I can cite two 
quite specific reasons. Joe Goldfield, an engi¬ 
neer in our group, who had an eye for what was 
pertinent, looked up standards set for cleanup 
of plutonium-contaminated sites elsewhere. 
Here’s what he found: 


Enewetak Atoll 

40pCi/g 

Johnston Atoll 

14pCi/g 

Hanford Site 

34pCi/g 

Nevada Test Site 

200pCi/g 

Fort Dix, NJ 

8pCi/g 

Livermore Lab 

lOpCi/g 


Even a fool could see that 651 is outrageous, 
especially for a site in an urban area. 

The other reason some were upset has to do 
with background radiation. The average back¬ 
ground level for plutonium deposited by global 
fallout along the Front Range in Colorado is 
0.04pCi/g. Doing the calculation, I saw that the 
651pCi/g plutonium action level just adopted 
by government agencies is 16,275 times the av¬ 
erage background deposits. Ed Martell, who in 
1970 had informed the public of danger posed 
by plutonium released from Rocky Flats, em¬ 
phasized that all humans globally live in a ra¬ 
diation-rich environment. Some of us, he said, 
will be harmed simply by exposure to naturally 
occurring background radiation. Adding to it, 


122 


A CRITICALITY 

as humans have done since the dawn of the nu¬ 
clear age, increases disease, damage and death. 
He criticized the nuclear enterprise in every 
field from medicine to weapons for the careless 
manner in which increased exposure is allowed. 
What I learned from him went with me into 
meetings where government officials repeated¬ 
ly tried to convince us that the plutonium they 
wanted to leave behind at Rocky Flats would 
do no harm. 

As for A1 Aim, in response to what he’d ob¬ 
served, he directed DOE’s Rocky Flats office to 
fund an independent study of the plutonium ac¬ 
tion levels. Thus was created the Radionuclide 
Soil Action Level Oversight Panel, to which I 
belonged. We hired a team of specialists and 
worked very closely with them for 18 months. 
In March 2000 we recommended a 95% re¬ 
duction of the plutonium soil action level from 
651pCi/g to 35. This number is still 875 times 
the 0.04 average background level. 

INTERLUDE: THE ROCKY FLATS 
NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE 

Before continuing with the cleanup issue, we 
need to look at creation of the Rocky Flats 
National Wildlife Refuge, because it has a di¬ 
rect bearing on the cleanup. Early in 2001 I 
received a paper entitled From Waste to Wil¬ 
derness: Maintaining Biodiversity on Nuclear- 
Bomb-Building Sites, by Robert H. Nelson of 
the Independence Institute, formerly with the 
Department of Interior. His thesis is that the 
government is spending too much on efforts 
to clean up nuclear weapons sites. Since, he 
says, most such sites weren’t harmed, it would 
cost much less not to clean them up but to 
leave them untouched as wildlife habitats. By 
offering the rationale for a cheaper cleanup, 


OF CONSCIENCE 

he provided the blueprint for the Rocky Flats 
National Wildlife Refuge Act, enacted by Con¬ 
gress later that same year. 

The Rocky Flats National Wildlife Refuge 
would not actually exist until completion of 
the Rocky Flats Superfund cleanup and trans¬ 
fer of land for the refuge from the DOE to 
U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service. In 2004 Fish & 
Wildlife issued a draft Environmental Impact 
Statement which declared that its preferred 
option for the future refuge includes public 
recreation on the site. Of the 1,280 parties 
that commented, 81% rejected public access 
to the refuge while only 11% explicitly fa¬ 
vored it. In February 2005 Fish & Wildlife 
nevertheless announced that it would allow 
public access, a fateful decision. 

THE "CLEANUP": 

WHO WILL BE PROTECTED? 

Rocky Flats was designated a Superfund site 
in 1989. Superfund law requires that cleanup 
standards for a given site must protect the “max¬ 
imally exposed individual” at that site. Once it 
was known that much of the Rocky Flats site 
would become a wildlife refuge, DOE and the 
regulators decided that the maximally exposed 
individual at Rocky Flats was a wildlife refuge 
worker, because he or she would spend more 
time outdoors on the site than anyone else. 

In 2001 the refuge worker scenario was di¬ 
rectly challenged in a report written by Arjun 
Makhijani of the Institute for Energy and En¬ 
vironmental Research for the Rocky Mountain 
Peace and Justice Center. Makhijani cut to the 
chase with the single most important question 
that could be asked about setting cleanup stan¬ 
dards: “How can we ensure the health of future 
generations, of land and water resources, and 


123 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


of ecosystems thousands of years into the fu¬ 
ture?” Fish & Wildlife Service and the U.S. gov¬ 
ernment will vanish long before plutonium in 
the environment ceases to be harmful. We can 
assume, said Makhijani, that eventually “peo¬ 
ple will live on the land and eat locally grown 
food.” For purposes of calculating soil action 
levels, they are the “maximally exposed.” Our 
responsibility is to protect them, not a wild¬ 
life refuge worker, though in protecting them 
we also protect the wildlife refuge worker as 
well as anyone who enters the site. Employing 
a “subsistence farmer scenario,” Makijhani and 
the Rocky Mountain Peace and Justice Center 
proposed that plutonium soil action levels for 
Rocky Flats be set at 10 pCi/g or less, by far the 
most conservative recommendation made by 
any party, and the only one explicitly calculat¬ 
ed to protect future generations. This wouldn’t 
work for DOE and the regulators: too expen¬ 
sive. Besides, they were committed to the refuge 
worker scenario. 

HOW CLEAN IS CLEAN? 

I reported before that after the public round¬ 
ly rejected the officially adopted 651 pCi/g plu¬ 
tonium action level, the Soil Action Level Over¬ 
sight Panel recommended that the action level 
be reduced 95%, from 651 to 35 pCi/g. With¬ 
out explaining why they rejected this propos¬ 
al, DOE, EPA and CDPHE started over. Intent 
on protecting a wildlife refuge worker, not un¬ 
knowing people who might live on the site in 
the distant future, in November 2003 they fi¬ 
nally proposed the following three-layered ap¬ 
proach for plutonium that could remain in soil: 

• Top 3 feet of soil: cleanup to 50 pCi/g 

• Soil 3 to 6 feet below the surface: 1,000 to 
7,000 pCi/g 


• Soil 6 or more feet below the surface: no 
limit on what may remain 

The first of these is 1,250 times the 0.04 
pCi/g average background level, the second 
25,000 to 175,00 times background, the third 
beyond calculation. 

We at the Rocky Mountain Peace and Justice 
Center with others continued to push for clean¬ 
up to background level as the ultimate goal. We 
urged DOE to tell us what this would cost so 
we could lobby Congress for the funds. Finally, 
in a public meeting, Joe Legare, an exasperat¬ 
ed DOE official, said we couldn’t get what we 
wanted because years earlier a closed-door deal 
had been made with Congress that put a cap on 
what could be spent on the Rocky Flats clean¬ 
up. The three-layered approach, we learned, 
could be done for the same sum as the rejected 
651 approach. 

DOE was up to its old tricks, this time 
with the complicity of EPA and CDPHE. In 
a critique of the Rocky Flats “cleanup” that 
I published in The Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists in 2005, I said money, not pub¬ 
lic health or environmental integrity, was the 
real driver of the “cleanup.” 

When the Draft Rocky Flats Cleanup 
Agreement containing the layered plutonium 
action levels was put out for public comment, 
86% of the commenting parties rejected it, 
mainly because of plutonium worries. In June 
2003 DOE and the regulators nevertheless 
adopted what they’d proposed. Kaiser-Hill, 


Rocky Flats Nuclear Weapons Plant before and 
after the cleanup. Literally nothing "that you can 
see" from the production plant is left on the site, 
but activists remain concerned about what still 
lies beneath the surface. 


124 













$ 0 3 E D I E N ; E 


Ei : 






W H> 'CLEAN' IS NOT CLEAN 

Some Rook'. Flats workers complained that 

the cleanup done bv Kaiser-Hill was one of hid- 

imp problems and cutting comers. None was so 

persistent as Terre San Pietro, who worked at 

me n an: tor three decades and tor several rears 
£ * 

was on the union's safety committee. His uncle, 
who also worked there, told him about seeing 
a DS Cat bulldozer dig a hole so deep that the 
tractor disappeared from sight. Barrels of waste 
were dumped into that hole. The uncle also 
told Jerry he'd seen a map showing otherwise 
unknown waste burial locations. Jem - and a 
union colleague were once allowed a brief look 
at rius man. He was amazed at how many plac¬ 
es radioactive and toxic stuff had been dumped. 
He sure he was probably the last hourly work¬ 
er to see that map. He became convinced that 
most of the places shown on that map would 
not be cleaned up. He raised his concerns with 
DOE. members ot Congress, oversight groups 
and anyone he thought might help. After he 
and I spoke. I bled a Freedom of Information 
Act request for the map. In due course, I re¬ 
ceived a package from DOE containing a map, 
nor what I sought but a widely available map 
Fd seen a dozen rimes. Jerry t hink s they prob¬ 
ably destroyed the map he : d seen. 

EChen Fm asked why I think the “cleanup” 
was inadequate, many things come to mind. 
Fii mention a few. To begin with, the cleanup 
was based on the erroneous assumption that 
plutonium left in the environment at the site 
would be immobile. This claim is countered 
by the empirical observations of M. Iggy Lit- 
aou w.-io taught environmental engineering at 
the University of Colorado, and with gradu¬ 
ate students studied the behavior of radioactive 
materials in the Rocky Flats environment. He 


























A CRITICALITY 0" CO',SCIENCE 


accepted the Rrx:ky Flats orthodoxy that pluto¬ 
nium in soil would stay put. But one Saturday 
morning in the unusually wet spring of 1995 
he received a phone call from one of his stu¬ 
dents who said, “Iggy, I’m out at Rocky Flats. 
The plutonium is moving. You better come out 
here.” Sure enough, the instruments they had 
set up in the field were detecting real time rap¬ 
id movement of plutonium in s hall ow sub-sur¬ 
face soil. “Nature taught me a lesson,” he said. 
He was dismissed by Kaiser-Fiill and replaced 
by the scientists who a decade later would con¬ 
clude that plutonium left m the soil at Rock}' 
Flats would be “relatively imm obile." Iggy, with 
a lot of help from me, made so much noise that 
no one from DOE, EPA or CDPHE can credibly 
claim that they were unaware of his findings. 

Shawn Smallwood countered the claim of 
plutonium imm obility with his study of bur¬ 
rowing animals at the site. He identified IS spe¬ 
cies, some of which dig to a depth of 10 to 16 
feet, all of which are constantly moving soil and 
adhering contaminants up and down. Plants 
loosen soil and bring stuff up while also creat¬ 
ing passages animals can use. The animals dis¬ 
turb 11 to 12% of surface soil at Rocky Flats 
in any given year. L T ndisturbed soils do not exist 
at the site. The more contaminated former in¬ 
dustrial zone is partially remediated to a depth 
of 6 feet and not at all below that level. Accord¬ 
ing to some non-predictable timeline, animal 
activity in this area makes plutonium particles 
available for the winds to earn them near and 
far, including, of course, onto the refuge and be¬ 
yond, perchance to be inhaled by unsuspecting 
people. Smallwood visited the site three times 
in 199(i, each rime accompanied b> Rocky Flats 
personnel. 1 le finished his report before the end 
of that year and two years later published his 


results in a processional journal. Has —:umgs 
were totally ignored by those who estubusheu 
the final sod remediation standards m 2*303. 

Earlier I mentioned that when an our-or-courr 
settlement was reached in the case rrougnr 
against RockweE atrer the FBI raid. Judge 
Sherman Fmesilver dismissec the grant jury 
and sealed documents rrom the case m the Den¬ 
ver Federal Courthouse. Do these documents 
contain evidence or environmental contamina¬ 
tion that should have been reviewed by those 
responsible for the Rocky Flats “cleanup?" 
That the grand ; ury opposed the settlement and 
refused to be dismissed until they wrote a re¬ 
port calling for indictment of RockweE ana 
DOE officials suggests that such review should 
have occurred. Yet the EPA and CDFHE. the 
agencies that reaulated the "cieanun." never re- 
viewed these documents. Wes McKinley, who 
was foreman of the grand iury and is forbidden 
by court order from revealing what he learned 
about environmental conditions at Rocky Flats, 
decries the fact that the “cleanup" was finished 
without the public or the regulators seeing the 
data sealed by Fmesilver. Likewise. Tor. Lipskv. 
who headed the FBI investigation, felt betraved 
by the sealing of the evidence and the failure to 
prosecute. The “cleanup." he says, is "woeru.lv 
inadequate - a farce.” 

This list of reasons why the Rocky Flats 
"cleanup" is inadequate could be extended. But 
I'll mention only one last item, which is less a 
reason than a question. Did the Rocky Flats 
cleanup violate the National Environmental 
Policy Act? This act requires federal agencies 
undertaking action that significantly atrects the 
human environment to go through the elabo¬ 
rate process of producing an Environmental 
Impact Statement FIS tor that action. An FIS 


12: 






iPRK 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 



Plutonium bqfot* 
■ >= 74,000 
g 18,50# -ROW 
g 1,850-11,500 
B 740-1.850 
B 1"0-T4§ 

S 188-3?# 


CSS-o 


sc*ie(« 


128 


































A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


was done at Rocky Flats in 1980. But one was 
not done for the cleanup, an activity the results 
of which will impact the human environment 
for as long as there is a human environment. 
Plans to do an EIS for the Rocky Flats cleanup 
were cancelled on February 25,1996. 

RULES FOR THE REFUGE 

After certification of the Rocky Flats “clean¬ 
up,” DOE transferred 4,465 acres of land 
(roughly seven square miles) to U.S. Fish & 
Wildlife Service (FWS) to operate as the Rocky 
Flats National Wildlife Refuge (RFNWR). EPA 
declared the FWS section of the Rocky Flats 
site suitable for any use and removed it from 
the Superfund list. The 1,309-acre portion re¬ 
tained by DOE is still on the Superfund list. We 
saw earlier that, despite objection by 86% of 
the commenting public, FWS intends to allow 
public access to the refuge. This has not hap¬ 
pened yet because FWS lacks funds to prepare 
the site for visitors. By comparison to DOE, 
FWS is a step-child among federal agencies, 
poorly funded and now saddled with care of a 
radioactive property for which it is ill equipped. 
Wes McKinley, who as foreman of the Rocky 
Flats Grand Jury learned things about the site 
the rest of us don’t know, got himself elected 
to the Colorado House of Representatives to 
do something about Rocky Flats. Before be¬ 
ing term limited, he tried several times to get 
a bill passed that would require signs at refuge 
entries informing potential visitors that going 


Two maps critical to understanding the current situ¬ 
ation at Rocky Flats. Top: Shows plutonium con¬ 
tamination levels south and east of the site, which 
appears in the upper lefthand corner. Bottom: 
Wildlife refuge boundaries on old site. 


onto the site entails some risk. His efforts to 
get this modicum of informed consent were re¬ 
peatedly slapped down, mainly by high-ranking 
Democrats and CDPHE officials. 

The first rule for the refuge is that it will be¬ 
come a playground, never mind what the com¬ 
menting public wants. The second rule is peo¬ 
ple who know nothing about Rocky Flats will 
be allowed to visit the refuge without the ben¬ 
efit of informed consent. 

RUMBLINGS ABOUT THE REFUGE 

One worry about the wildlife refuge is that a 
government agency ill equipped to deal with a 
radioactive site has been saddled with the task of 
managing one. They’re experienced with wildlife 
but probably haven’t even raised the question of 
whether any studies of genetic effects on wildlife 
from radiation exposure have been conducted. 
They have not. If asked about radioactive ma¬ 
terial in the environment on the refuge site. Fish 
& Wildlife personnel duck behind EPA’s decla¬ 
ration that the site is safe for any use. And they 
know that the Rocky Flats site was cleaned to 
a level that protects refuge workers. What they 
may not know is that the most vulnerable of 
all creatures exposed to plutonium is a human 
child. This is so for several reasons: 

• A child is more likely than an adult to stir 
up dust, to eat dirt, to breathe in gasps, or to 
scrape a knee or an elbow, all ways of taking 
tiny particles of plutonium into the body. 

• Since a child’s body is smaller than an 
adult’s, internalized plutonium has much less 
mass in which to be distributed or to concen¬ 
trate. 

• Plutonium within a child’s body integrates 
with that child’s growth and tissue develop¬ 
ment. 


129 



A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 



• By contrast to either adult humans or other 
beings, a child’s normal life span provides far 
more time for internalized plutonium to harm 
her or his health. 

If the refuge is opened to the public, Fish & 
Wildlife personnel will bring groups of chil¬ 
dren to Rocky Flats for field trips, and they’ll 
encourage families to visit the refuge. As a fa¬ 
ther of three and a grandfather of five, having 
learned what I’ve learned by paying attention 
for 35 years, I’ll do my best to make sure none 
of my offspring or theirs ever go to Rocky Flats. 
But what about those who are not informed, 
especially in the long term, after fences fall and 
memory fades? What can be done for them? 
The decision to turn the Rocky Flats Wildlife 
Refuge into a playground was a human deci¬ 
sion. Human decisions can be reversed, and this 
one should be. 

At the time of this writing, in spring 2013, an 
issue related to the refuge that for now over¬ 
shadows the question of public access is the 


Indiana Street looking south along the eastern, 
most contaminated edge of the old Rocky Flats 
site. Everything to the right of the road is part 
of the new wildlife refuge. Plans are now under¬ 
way to develop this section of Indiana into the 
proposed Jefferson Parkway, despite public con¬ 
cerns of stirring up plutonium-laden dust during 
construction. See maps page 128. 

plan to build the proposed Jefferson Parkway 
along the eastern, most contaminated edge of 
the Rocky Flats site. Now intended as a private¬ 
ly financed tollway, back in 1989, when tax¬ 
payers would have covered the cost, the road 
was put to a vote and defeated by a margin of 
four to one, mainly due to worries of stirring 
up plutonium-laden dust. Current proponents 
of build-it-and-they’ll-come urban sprawl insist 
that the Jefferson Parkway is necessary; others 
call their dream the “plutonium parkway.” Peo¬ 
ple who never heard of Rocky Flats are ener¬ 
gized to oppose the highway by what they’re 
learning about plutonium. 


130 
















A CRITICALITY 

In order for the road to be built, Fish& Wild¬ 
life had to cede to the Jefferson Public High¬ 
way Authority a 300-foot-wide strip of land 
along the eastern edge of the refuge proper¬ 
ty (see dotted line highway route on top map, 
page 128) In the summer of 2012 FWS did 
an Environmental Assessment to determine 
whether the land transfer required them to 
do a full-fledged Environmental Impact State¬ 
ment (EIS), which would have delayed things 
for a couple of years. Though at the one public 
meeting FWS held, everyone present called on 
them to do an EIS, they issued instead a Find¬ 
ing of No Significant Impact, meaning that 
there would be no study to determine whether 
plutonium stirred up by construction of a su¬ 
perhighway would have a significant impact, 
because, without doing such a study, FWS 
knew there’d be no significant impact. With 
this courageous decision they bypassed the 
public and gave themselves a green light to go 
ahead with the land switch. 

The very next day two affected towns, Supe¬ 
rior and Golden, and two environmental groups 
filed suit to require an EIS. This slowed things a 
bit, but not much. Without repeating all the she¬ 
nanigans behind what was happening, I’ll sim¬ 
ply report that on the last day of 2012 a feder¬ 
al judge caved to pressure from the Department 
of Interior, where Fish & Wildlife is housed, 
and permitted the land transfer, effectively rul¬ 
ing that no EIS was required and dismissing the 
lawsuit that had sought one. So the Jefferson 
Public Highway Authority, a non-governmen¬ 
tal body, now possesses the land on which it in¬ 
tends to build its plutonium parkway. Efforts are 
still afoot to stop this. Again, because everything 
about the highway is human action, it can be re¬ 
versed. The 99% say NO to the 1%. 


OF CONSCIENCE 

I personally can imagine a revival of civil 
disobedience at Rocky Flats, this time to stop 
a major highway from being built through an 
area contaminated with plutonium. 

WHAT ABOUT THE DOE LANDS 
AT THE CORE OF THE REFUGE? 

On completion of the “cleanup,” most of 
the Rocky Flats property was transferred to 
Fish & Wildlife to manage as a refuge, while 
DOE’S Legacy Management Office (LM) re¬ 
tained 1,309 acres (about 2 square miles) of 
more contaminated land for ongoing monitor¬ 
ing and maintenance. Another name for LM is 
long-term stewardship. A National Academy 
of Sciences report on long-term stewardship 
published in 2000 concluded that “DOE’s pre¬ 
ferred solutions - reliance on engineered bar¬ 
riers and institutional controls - are inherent¬ 
ly failure prone.” At Rocky Flats, LM relies on 
dams and fences, that is, on “engineered barri¬ 
ers and institutional controls.” 

LM at Rocky Flats isn’t waiting for these sys¬ 
tems to fail; it’s rushing the process. I wrote a 
brief paper for DOE about the example I’ll cite, 
namely, what’s being done about surface water 
leaving the site. Colorado has a strict standard 
for plutonium in surface water. As it leaves the 
site on either of the two creeks that drain the 
area, plutonium and americium (Pu/Am) con¬ 
tent in the water must not exceed 0.15 pico- 
curies per liter (pCi/L). The sampling location 
where the water exits the site is a “point of 
compliance.” Sampling locations upstream are 
“points of evaluation.” According to the rules 
of the game, failure to meet the standard at a 
point of compliance results in a penalty, while 
failure at a point of evaluation puts DOE on 
notice to correct the problem. In a three month 


131 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


period in 2011 Pu/Am concentrations exceed¬ 
ed the standard at a specific point of evalua¬ 
tion. DOE regarded this as a minor problem, 
because at the exit point downstream the water 
was in compliance. 


■ 

. 

is* 



Currently, only a simple barbed-wire fence and 
designate the DOE retained area within the Rocky 


the downstream site boundary to meet the state 
standard. Moreover, it would be impossible to 
identify the source of the fugitive plutonium, 
much less to predict when it would show up. In 
2012, referencing the information in the two 

previous paragraphs, I 
sent DOE a paper en- 

» titled, Is Long-Term 

Stewardship Unraveling 
at Rocky Flats? 

For its LM work at 
the site, DOE established 
and funds the Rocky 
Flats Stewardship Coun¬ 
cil (SC). This organiza¬ 
tion was deliberately cre¬ 
ated not as a body that 
balances the full range of 
views about Rocky Flats 
but rather to ensure that 
control rests with repre¬ 
sentatives of local gov¬ 


non-informative signs 
Flats Wildlife Refuge. 


Things are under control. But are they? Dur¬ 
ing production years a series of dams was 
constructed on both the creeks that drain the 
Rocky Flats site in order to impede water flow 
and allow plutonium and americium to sink 
to the bottom of the resultant holding ponds. 
By the time water passed through the series of 
ponds it would meet the Pu/Am standard at the 
site boundary. In summer 2010, DOE, with the 
approval of EPA and CDPHE, began breaching 
the holding pond dams to restore free-flow to 
the streams. In doing this, DOE ignored a re¬ 
port written in 2001 as part of the study of plu¬ 
tonium migration at the site. This report con¬ 
cluded that even if the site were cleaned to as 
low as 10 pCi/g (by contrast to the 50+ actually 
adopted), there eventually would be a failure at 


ernments. Besides permanently holding eight of 
the 12 seats, they select those who fill the other 
four. Generally, the SC is a very decent if docile 
group, united perhaps in a political need not to 
make waves that could impact negatively on the 
aura of prosperity important to the burgeoning 
suburban communities around Rocky Flats. We 
at the Rocky Mountain Peace and Justice Cen¬ 
ter have not sought SC membership because, if 
admitted, we’d be routinely marginalized. 

The SC has on occasion taken sides on a di¬ 
visive issue, the clearest example being its re¬ 
peated opposition to Wes McKinley’s efforts 
to get signs at the Rocky Flats National Wild¬ 
life Refuge informing potential visitors of risk 
entailed in visiting the refuge. By 2010 the SC 
was advising Fish & Wildlife on language for 


132 



A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


signs the agency would post at refuge entries. 
Any organization that advises a federal agency 
must comply with the Federal Advisory Com¬ 
mittee Act (FACA) requirement that it “be fair¬ 
ly balanced in terms of the points of view rep¬ 
resented.” Clearly, the SC did not meet this 
requirement. I contacted DOE’s Office of Gen¬ 
eral Counsel and asked them either to abolish 
the SC for violating FACA or to reconstitute 
it to conform with the FACA requirement of 
“fairly balanced” representation. In response, 
on May 12, 2010, DOE attorney Susan Beard 
wrote a strongly worded letter to DOE Leg¬ 
acy Management Director David Geiser. She 
made it very clear that the SC is not an advi¬ 
sory body and that it exists solely to convey 
information back and forth between DOE 
and the public. Three times in a brief letter 
she says the SC must perform its role of trans¬ 
mitting information “without edit or filter.” 

When the SC was created, then LM Director 
Michael Owen, in a December 28, 2005 letter 
to Shaun McGrath, at the time Chair of the 
Rocky Flats Coalition of Local Governments, 
vetoed having the SC work with U.S. Fish &c 
Wildlife. “We cannot direct an organization 
to work with another federal agency.” Clearly, 
when the SC opposed Wes McKinley’s efforts 
to get informed consent signs at the wildlife ref¬ 
uge, and when then it advised Fish & Wildlife 
regarding language for signs the agency would 
post at the refuge, the SC was out of bounds. 
Even now, despite Michael Owen’s very clear 
prohibition, the SC mission statement posted 
on its web site declares that the SC “also works 
with the United States Fish and Wildlife Ser¬ 
vice on issues related to the management of the 
Rocky Flats National Wildlife Refuge.” Out of 
bounds, yes. 


Only recently have I learned that the SC, in 
its own view, can do non-DOE work provided 
this work is funded by non-DOE sources. 

CONCLUSION 

In writing this account, I have passed over 
many things. I have said little about the “global 
threat” of Rocky Flats, having concentrated in¬ 
stead on the “local hazard.” The global threat 
has not disappeared. The fissile plutonium pit 
at the core of every warhead in the U.S. arse¬ 
nal was made at Rocky Flats. Ever since pro¬ 
duction ended at Rocky Flats, efforts have been 
made to get a second Rocky Flats into produc¬ 
tion somewhere else, the biggest effort toward 
this end being at Los Alamos, where, as of this 
writing, about 30 pits have been produced. At 
present, things are on hold for full-scale pit pro¬ 
duction at Los Alamos, but the issue isn’t dead. 
The very idea of building another pit facility 
flies in the face of U.S. obligations under Article 
VI of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty to 
work in good faith for the abolition of nuclear 
weapons. Our slowness to lead other countries 
in this direction encourages nuclear prolifera¬ 
tion. Only two bombs have been used against 
humans. But the global threat posed by Rocky 
Flats hasn’t ended. 

In the preceding pages, I have not referred 
to the controversies that surround the ton or 
more of plutonium unaccounted for at Rocky 
Flats. Is it in the ground at the Idaho Nation¬ 
al Lab, as DOE claims? Or is a great deal of it 
in the off-site environment, as Tom Cochran, 
nuclear specialist with the Natural Resources 
Defense Council, believes? Some of it I know, 
having seen documentation uncovered by the 
late Adrienne Anderson, is at the Lowry Land¬ 
fill where for years it was illegally dumped, as 


133 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


reported by Eileen Welsome in a series of arti¬ 
cles published in Westword in 2001. 

Nor have I talked about my five or so years 
as a token outsider serving on two committees 
of the National Council on Radiation Protec¬ 
tion and Measurements, an experience in which 
I was privileged to be steeped in the cynicism of 
those high priests of science who research ra¬ 
diation health effects and, with no input from 
those affected, make recommendations on stan¬ 
dards for permissible exposure. I could write a 
great deal about either of these as well as other 
aspects of my part in the nuclear age. 

I haven’t mentioned that Denver native Bill 
Mitchell, after he’d been in Seattle for a while, 
started the Military Production Network, now 
known as the Alliance for Nuclear Account¬ 
ability, a network of grassroots groups focused 
on nuclear issues at DOE sites across the coun¬ 
try; MPN/ANA has made and continues to 
make an inestimable contribution to the nucle¬ 
ar work of the Rocky Mountain Peace and Jus¬ 
tice Center. Then there’s the Rocky Flats Cold 
War Museum now in the process of being creat¬ 
ed; I serve on the museum’s board because our 
intent is to tell the whole Rocky Flats story, not 
just the official account but also the why and 
how of resistance. 

Two decades ago Joanna Macy conceived the 
Nuclear Guardianship Ethic. Its first principle 
is this: “Each generation shall endeavor to pre¬ 
serve the foundations of life and well-being for 
those who come after. To produce and abandon 
substances that damage following generations 
is morally unacceptable.” Rocky Flats presents 
the opportunity to apply this ethic at a specif¬ 
ic site. The Rocky Mountain Peace and Justice 
Center is committed to this effort. Visit www. 
rockyflatsnuclearguardianship.org 


In keeping with this approach, some of us 
are asking Congress to require DOE sites like 
Rocky Flats that undergo Superfund clean¬ 
up be kept off-limits to the public for at least 
200 years after completion of the cleanup. This 
would allow future radiation studies to deter¬ 
mine health effects, if any, of chronic low-level 
exposure. Enacting such legislation would cost 
nothing, would be a healthy response to uncer¬ 
tainties and would bring credit to the country 
and to supporting legislators. 

If Congress cannot act, or will not, it’s up to 
“we the people” to take positive measures for 
Rocky Flats. We should not forget that Rocky 
Flats is like a movie set, attractive, with every¬ 
thing in place. But the structure is flimsy. It 
can’t last. And when it collapses, the outcome 
won’t be comedy. 

One non-comedy already unfolding at Rocky 
Flats is that people are living in houses built over 
the last half-dozen years on land that Atomic 
Energy Commission scientists showed in 1970 
to be contaminated with plutonium released 
from Rocky Flats. Each year I hear from a few 
people asking whether they should buy houses 
in areas known to be contaminated. I never tell 
them what to do, only why I would not choose 
to live there. But there’s nothing to stop develop¬ 
ers from building houses in the vicinity of Rocky 
Flats with its spectacular mountain backdrop. 

The largest development now underway near 
Rocky Flats is Candelas which, when com¬ 
pleted, will stretch almost four miles along the 
southern edge of the Rocky Flats site. On Sat¬ 
urday, June 1, 2013, Candelas developers held 
a Grand Opening so potential buyers could 
see model homes and learn about plans for the 
area. Among those who showed up, however, 
were a couple of dozen people whose purpose 


134 


A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 



A young mule deer buck trots across the tracks 
leading into Rocky Flats in the wildlife refuge's 
newly acquired southwestern Section 16. 


was to reveal to the unknowing why living at 
Candelas is risky. These people belonged to no 
organization. They simply responded to the ap¬ 
peal from a mother from a nearby community 
who was aware of the history of Rocky Flats 
and thought living at Candelas would be un¬ 
wise. She wanted to share what she knew with 
others before they committed to buying proper¬ 
ty and raising children on the edge of the Rocky 
Flats site. She had attracted her companions 
with a web site that declared “Candelas Glows: 


Colorado’s plutonium-laden housing develop¬ 
ment.” It explained succinctly why living next 
door to Rocky Flats is a bad idea, and, further, 
that constructing the planned Jefferson Park¬ 
way - called by some the “plutonium parkway” 
- is likewise foolish and must be opposed. 

These people are part of a renaissance of 
Rocky Flats activism. They are to be honored 
for their commitment and willingness to put 
their lives on the line, really, for all of us, includ¬ 
ing those who will come onto the scene long af¬ 
ter we are gone. They show that not everyone 
is in denial and that opposition to folly, which 
is what Rocky Flats resistance has always been 
about, is alive and well. May their tribe increase. 


135 


Photo: Marty Caivano, Boulder Daily Camera 







A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


AFTERWORD 

BY DANIEL ELLSBERG 
& JOSEPH DANIEL 

n the 35th year anniversary of the “year of 
disobedience” at Rocky Flats photo-journalist 
Joseph Daniel reconnected with activist Daniel 
Ellsberg to talk about those pivotal 12 months. 
The conversation began as a nostalgic ramble, 
with Ellsberg coining a provocative new term 
“half-life of awareness” and both men recall¬ 
ing with amazement the famous “picture on the 
tracks.” Then the relevance of it all seemed to 
focus the discussion on what has transpired since 
then; the end of the cold war and the death of 
the anti-nuclear weapons movement, the threat 
of terrorists and crazy state leaders like Kim Jong 
Un, the new data about Nuclear Winter, govern¬ 
ment surveillance versus democracy, and honor¬ 
ing patriotic whistleblowers. 

JD: Hi Dan, it’s really terrific to talk with you 
again after all these years. 

DE: Yes, I agree. And 
it’s wonderful to hear 
about your plans to re-re- 
lease your book; A Year 
of Disobedience and a 
Criticality of Conscience. 

It’s very important from a timing standpoint. 

JD: Well, that’s just what I want to talk 
with you about. It’s been 35 years since that 
first action on the tracks at Rocky Flats, but 
suddenly with North Korea in the news and 
Iran, and even the potential threat from ter¬ 
rorists, it’s all feeling very relevant again. 


So, let me begin with the obvious question, or 
maybe not so obvious depending on your point 
of view. If the threat from nuclear weapons is 
as great today as we perceive it to be, was the 
Rocky Flats Truth Force sitting on the tracks in 
1978 and ’79 a successful action? 

DE: As I note in the original preface of your 
book, several people said that our major, imme¬ 
diate goal of the action was to raise awareness 
about what dangers were imposed and we cer¬ 
tainly did that in a big way. 

I found it amazing at the time that most peo¬ 
ple in Denver, and even many of the seasoned 
journalists interviewing me at the time, were 
not even aware of what Rocky Flats did, what 
kind of a plant it actually was. Many thought 
it had something to do with nuclear energy and 
they weren’t at all aware of the fact that they 
had this weapons plant next to them. So we cer¬ 
tainly raised that awareness. 

I think we also raised the awareness of the 
power of civil disobedience, that is the thought 
that if you are willing to take some personal 
risks in your life towards changing your life, 
and suffering some costs or inconvenience to 

do so, you can be heard 
and you can have an ef¬ 
fect. You have power 
more than you realize 
when you ask yourself, 
“What could I do about 
this if I were willing to 
go to jail?.” And that conveys a message from 
jail or from the courtroom or from the tracks 
or from wherever, that is hard to convey any 
other way. That this is really very urgent and 
it’s a matter of conscience and that it is some¬ 
thing people should wake up to. So I think we 
did convey that for a while as well, you know. 



IN OTHER WORDS OUR 
ACTION HAD SORT 
OF A HALF-LIFE OF 
ITS OWN. AND IT 
WASN'T VERY LONG. 


136 



A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


But, that said, I have to relate a disappoint¬ 
ing and dismaying element about the perceived 
long-term effects of our action. Yes, the FBI raid 
in 1989, and the grand jury that followed, even¬ 
tually stopped production at the plant. But from 
reading the material at that time, I found that 
most of the people writing or commenting on 
it seemed to be totally unaware of what we had 
done ten years earlier. In other words our action 
had sort of a half-life of its own. And it wasn’t 
very long. Any significant public awareness of it 
would mostly be gone in ten years. That was dis¬ 
appointing. It was as if 
people had just discov¬ 
ered for the first time 
that the place was dan¬ 
gerous locally as well 
as globally. 

JD: Wow, a half-life 
of awareness, a half-life 
of conscience. That’s an appropriate analogy. 

DE: And of course we see that again with 
Iraq. About 30 years after Vietnam it was not 
evident that anybody learned from Vietnam in 
the government from that earlier war. Granted 
most of the people in the government that got 
us into Iraq had successfully evaded serving in 
Vietnam, though they were draft age then and 
they seem to have been oblivious to the anti¬ 
war activity in that time. They didn’t take it se¬ 
riously. So, they go through the same process. It 
was as easy to fool the public about getting into 
that war in 2002 as it had been thirty years ear¬ 
lier in Vietnam. 

JD: So nothing changes. 

DE: Thirty years... Okay thirty years is a 
pretty good long time, that’s a whole genera¬ 
tion and then some, people have forgotten. 
What’s even more distressing, though, and this 


kind of relates to your question in a way, is that 
for the last seven years we have been in the pro¬ 
cess of getting fooled into war with Iran in pret¬ 
ty much the same way as Iraq, and that’s just 
a few years afterwards. So, people don’t - cer¬ 
tainly governments don’t, and populations as a 
whole don’t - seem to retain lessons that they 
may have learned from something like this very 
well. But to get back to Rocky Flats . . . 

JD: Well, let me ask you then, is the real role 
for activists, particularly after apparently suc¬ 
cessful actions, the need to figure out how to 

keep their message 
alive over time? 

DE: Well, I’ll tell you 
- yes it could be. Very 
much so, and that is 
why I am very happy 
to see this book com¬ 
ing out again. This 
will fill in that huge gap in the memory of peo¬ 
ple, even of the country, and of the world. Rocky 
Flats is an example of an action that was real¬ 
ly in many ways very successful. I’ll never for¬ 
get that editorial in the Rocky Mountain News , 
which if I recall at the time, was basically a Re¬ 
publican paper. They had not been very sympa¬ 
thetic towards the action on the whole, and that 
made it all the more powerful when their edito¬ 
rial came out during our trial. I think it was at 
the end of the trial just after the sentence was 
handed down - which amounted to an acquittal 
really, six months probation suspended, no jail 
time - and I recall the Rocky Mountain News 
editorial saying something like, “Whatever you 
think of the tactics of the people who have been 
sitting on the tracks you have to agree with their 
major aim. Rocky Flats must go!” And you 
know, I just felt for the major newspaper in that 


YOU HAVE POWER MORE 
THAN YOU REALIZE WHEN 
YOU ASK YOURSELF "WHAT 
COULD I DO ABOUT THIS 
IF I WERE WILLING TO 
GO TO JAIL?" 


137 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


area to have drawn that lesson from our action 
was remarkable. 

JD: But to your point, it would be ten more 
years before it would go. 

DE: Well yeah, it did take ten more years. And 
interestingly, I’ll bet if you look at the Rocky 
Mountain News in 1989,1 bet you will not find 
any reference to the fact that the paper had al¬ 
ready arrived at that decision ten years earlier. 

JD: There’s your 
half-life of memory 
again. That’s good. 

DE: Yeah, well it’s 
pretty short. But why 
did our sitting on the 
tracks at Rocky Flats 
have as big of an im¬ 
pact as it did? Really 
there aren’t many ac¬ 
tions you can look to - 
and I’ve been in a lot of 
them over the last 40 
years - where you can point to as many differ¬ 
ent areas of success and effect and get as much 
attention. I’ll mention two things that do come 
right up to the present as well. One is that I real¬ 
ized within days of being on the tracks that we 
had a very unusual situation there. 

These were not my first risks by any means, 
though I didn’t really start getting arrested a 
lot until the 1976 Continental Walk for Peace 
and Social Justice, which was aimed at nucle¬ 
ar weapons. So it was only a couple of years 
earlier that I started getting arrested, except of 
course for my first arrest [for releasing the Pen¬ 
tagon Papers] which faced me with 115 years in 
prison. That was for 12 felony counts, so that 
first arrest was a killer. 

But when it came to Rocky Flats I realized 


that we had a different situation, which was 
that you could maintain a continuous civil dis¬ 
obedience action over days, and what turned 
out to be, of course, most of a year. And the 
primary reason for that was because we were 
not doing it on a road. Any action on a road 
and they’d clear you off right away because 
traffic was coming all the time. So they don’t 
let you stop a road for more than minutes or 

hours at the most. I 
have sat in the road 
in the middle of Mar¬ 
ket Street in San Fran¬ 
cisco - my wife and I 
a couple of years ago 
- over Iraq, and they 
didn’t clear us out for 
several hours. We ac¬ 
tually stopped the 
buses and everything, 
but that’s the most 
you can hope for on 
the road. Then they are going to get you off it. 

At Rocky Flats they chose at first to pre¬ 
tend, as you remember, to lie and to pretend 
that the tracks we were on were essentially 
an unused spur and that we could stay there 
as long as we wanted and they weren’t going 
to arrest anybody. There was no need to they 
said, they didn’t really use that track at all. 
But we quickly heard from people inside the 
plant and otherwise that this was a lie. 

But their hope was that the extreme winter 
weather of heavy snow and sleet, ice and every¬ 
thing, hail coming from every direction... that 
would get us off, make us leave. So they pre¬ 
ferred to not give us the publicity of an arrest. 

So we sat them out by sitting on those tracks 
in civil disobedience and eventually “obstruct- 


I REALIZED 
WE HAD A DIFFERENT 
SITUATION AT ROCKY 
FLATS, WHICH WAS THAT 
YOU COULD MAINTAIN 
A CONTINUOUS CIVIL 
DISOBEDIENCE ACTION 
OVER DAYS, AND WHAT 
TURNED OUT TO BE MOST 
OF A YEAR. 


138 


A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


ing the normal activity of Rocky Flats.” That 
was my “occupation” for several days—that 
was the charge against us, and it was the basis 
for my claim in court that I had an occupation 
in Colorado so that I could qualify to be bailed 
out if I wanted. 

We did eventually get arrested, but we’d go 
back and again and they’d fall into a pattern 
where instead of arresting us as soon as we 
got on the tracks, they would wait until a train 
came, as it has to come several times a week. 
They had been lying. It was not an unused spur, 
they had to use it to get the radioactive waste out 
of the plant. So, except for the moments when 
the train came by, you could be there doing your 
civil disobedience con¬ 
tinuously and repeat¬ 
edly and be left alone. 

So that was definitely 
a unique situation. 

JD: Yeah, and it cer¬ 
tainly backfired on 
them from the publici¬ 
ty standpoint. Waiting 
for a train to arrive 
only made the arrests 
more dramatic. Here’s 
this small group of 
protesters huddled in the snow on the track and 
suddenly a super posse of sheriffs leap from a 
huge train to arrest them. Very strong visually. 

DE: Well yes, that’s the photo in your book 
[cover image]. It’s become an iconic image of 
this action. That’s me in the middle wearing 
that cowboy hat [laughs]. I had come out for 
this rally on April 29th in Denver first, and then 
went out to Rocky Flats to what became the ac¬ 
tion. But first there was a rally in Denver and it 
was so hot that it was unbearable, so I left the 


rally and I went into a nearby Stetson store to 
get myself a hat for protection from the sun. Of 
course it works just as well as protection from 
the snow and cold. So, it shows up in so many 
of your photographs. 

But we never thought they would give us the 
opportunity of us with a train in the same pic¬ 
ture. Because we thought, they will be smarter 
than that. That would be too dramatic visually 
to have us actually stop a train. Right? 

Of course, as you know, the first arrest on the 
tracks was not for a train. But I think they made 
a little mistake there, as well. We said that we 
were going to continue the action until May 27th 
after President Carter had come. I think they 

thought, okay, that’s 
too long, we’ve just got 
to go ahead and make 
the arrest. They made 
that decision, I think, 
back at the Department 
of Energy. 

Ironically the Secre¬ 
tary of Energy at that 
time was a guy by the 
name of Jim Schlesinger 
who I had first recom¬ 
mended as an employ¬ 
ee of Rand. He had been just ahead of me at 
Harvard. He was a summa in economics, as I 
was a couple of years later, and I didn’t know 
him very well, but I had read stuff by him on 
defense issues and, at his request, I had actually 
recommended him for Rand, and that was the 
start of his career. He ended up as the Secretary 
of Defense, Director of the CIA, and then the 
Secretary of Energy. Big career. Not something 
I am very proud of by the way - he was on the 
wrong side of all of these issues. 


THERE'S THIS 
SMALL GROUP OF 
PROTESTERS HUDDLED 
IN THE SNOW ON THE 
TRACK AND A BUTCH 
CASSIDY SUPER POSSE 
OF SHERIFFS LEAPS 
FROM A GIANT TRAIN 
TO ARREST THEM. 


139 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


He had been very friendly to me when I 
was at Rand. But of course after the Pen¬ 
tagon paper that all changed. I heard later 
that he said that one of the happiest actions 
he was able to take as head of the Depart¬ 
ment of Energy was to sign the arrest order 
for Daniel Ellsberg at Rocky Flats. 

But, anyway, so they give the order to arrest us 
and that is the day the 30 inches of snow started, 
which would have, as your pictures show, col¬ 
lapsed all our tents anyway. That snow might 
have actually driven us off, but too late, the ar¬ 
rest was underway. So you get these dramatic 
pictures, of course, of us, as we put it, being “res¬ 
cued by the police” from the weather. Of course 
we didn’t say that in the press conference. 

So that’s the other thing. What gave our action 
real publicity from the first day was the fact that 
the weather turned ter¬ 
ribly bad, and it was 
very dramatic that 
we were experienc¬ 
ing extreme weather 
out there. The evening 
news in the Denver 
area showed pictures 
of people sitting first 
in rain and sleet, and 
then snow, and sympa¬ 
thizers, if you remem¬ 
ber, organized a whole caravan of cars out there 
to give us better winter equipment, and more 
equipment than we could actually use. We had 
extra tents, [laughs] we had tents for books and 
tents for food and tents for health, every kind of 
tent, everybody had a tent. 

I was wearing boots somebody had brought 
out, heavy boots, because when we started the 
action it was not just strong sunlight but heat 


on that first day, and it immediately switched to 
winter. So the effect then on the television news 
was of people who were there for their beliefs, 
prepared to experience extreme weather, and 
that conveys the sense of dedication and urgen¬ 
cy that the civil disobedience in itself does, right? 

JD: Right. And then the next arrest with the 
train was even more dramatic. 

DE: Yes, that’s funny thing... the real reason 
was because we had set up our second camp a 
couple of miles inland from the road, so with¬ 
out skis or boots the police were not prepared 
to go in there after us in the deep snow, so they 
decided to travel in by train to arrest us and 
the effect is dramatic - like the Super Posse in 
Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid. And, of 
course, it isn’t all just a matter of visual effect 
here. There we are huddled on the track with 

our flags and we’re 
watching this train 
coming at us very 
slowly and we’re pret¬ 
ty sure, you know, that 
there would be plenty 
of time for us to leap 
off the track if any¬ 
one had a mind to do 
that. No one did, and 
in fact, do you remem¬ 
ber Jay Dillon with his 
long red hair? He laid down with his head on 
one rail and his feet on the other and we were 
right behind him. I asked him later how he hap¬ 
pened to do that - he did it as though he had 
been practicing it - and he said, “I wanted to be 
sure that I wouldn’t run away.” 

And so there we are, the train is coming slow¬ 
ly and we were sure, I was sure, that they didn’t 
want to run us over or they would have been 


THE EVENING NEWS 
SHOWED PICTURES OF 
PEOPLE SITTING IN 
FIRST RAIN AND SLEET 
AND THEN SNOW. THEY 
WERE THERE FOR THEIR 
BELIEFS, PREPARED 
TO EXPERIENCE THE 
EXTREME WEATHER. 


140 


A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


barreling along. They didn’t want to run over 
us, but had they practiced stopping? Did they 
know how long it took them to stop for sure? 
So it was a game of chicken somewhat and we 
all had to ask ourselves, I think, “Am I going to 
jump off if it gets real 
close or not?” But no¬ 
body did and the train 
stops about 50 feet 
away and then silence. 

We’re looking at the 
train and the train is 
looking at us and then 
silently these police 
come out of the train 
and that’s where I had 
the feeling that it was like the Butch Cassidy 
Super Posse. And I was told later by some jour¬ 
nalist who had talked to the police, that they 
had the same image in mind. They were all sit¬ 
ting inside the train and saying this is like Butch 
Cassidy [laughs]. Yeah. Yeah. So now having 
admitted that I’m a terrific fan of Butch Cas¬ 
sidy and the Sundance Kid... 

JD: Well, it was a remarkably lucky image, 
you know. 

DE: Yeah, it was a big moment. So, anyway 
that is the exact kind of thing I’m talking about. 
It’s like, of course it has the power and now 
we’re talking more than visual or more than 
beautiful photography. We’re talking about 
emotional impact. Think how close that image 
is to the one of the guy stopping the tanks in Ti¬ 
ananmen Square in China. That’s the idea. We 
were saying stop and we did stop it, for, okay 
for minutes. And the point I think, as I said lat¬ 
er, what this shows is that - oh yeah, I think it 
was my son actually, Robert, who said in his 
testimony, this shows that a few people with 


dedication can slow up this plant or stop this 
plant you know, for hours and the people as a 
whole, the public as a whole, can do it perma¬ 
nently, and that is what we must do. 

JD: And ultimately you were successful in shut¬ 
ting down the plant 
down permanently. 

DE: Yeah. But as I 
say, it would be nice 
to feel that ten years 
later the events had a 
direct relationship to 
what we did. 

JD: But they did. 
There has to have 
been a certain building 
up of awareness - half-life or otherwise - you 
know. Clearly the FBI and EPA weren’t igno¬ 
rant about what activists were saying and do¬ 
ing about Rocky Flats and ultimately it was an 
internal whistleblower who prompted the FBI 
raid and another concerned person or persons 
who leaked the grand jury proceedings which 
ultimately shut down the plant for good. It 
wasn’t exactly pretty but it was effective. 

DE: Yes, the leak in that case was quite im¬ 
portant, the way things developed. But it was 
not a question of our being able to close the 
plant on the grounds of its nuclear, global dan¬ 
gers. It ultimately was about local danger and 
risk. Remember that slogan - which was a very 
good slogan - that was used by the people that 
came before us. I believe it was the Quakers 
and others. Their slogan was “local hazard, 
global threat,” wasn’t that it? 

JD: Yeah, that’s right. They didn’t want to 
shut the plant down, they wanted to turn it into 
something that manufactured items that were 
socially useful. 


WE NEVER CAME CLOSE 
TO SHUTTING DOWN 
ROCKY FLATS ON THE 
“GLOBAL RISK" ISSUE, 
BECAUSE THAT'S ROOTED 
IN OUR FOREIGN POLICY 
- A RELIANCE ON 
NUCLEAR WEAPONS... 


141 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


DE: Yeah, right. Well, the global risk part 
of it was not something we could do just in 
one action or in many, many actions. We nev¬ 
er came close to shutting down Rocky Flats on 
the “global risk” issue, because that’s rooted in 
our foreign policy - a reliance on nuclear weap¬ 
ons, and not just for deterring nuclear attacks 
but for threatening 
nuclear attacks, and 
that is why we have 
as many of them as we 
have. That policy has 
not changed. It hasn’t 
even come close to 
changing. So in terms 
of raising the issue of 
the arms race it wasn’t 
a focus of the people 
trying to close Rocky 
Flats in 1989, they 
had, in a way, a more 
powerful local focus in 
terms of actually closing the plant. 

JD: Yeah. I agree. So where are the activists 
today? I mean - hasn’t the anti-nuclear weap¬ 
ons movement sort of faltered? 

DE: Almost disappeared. Not entirely, that 
would be unfair but it’s really been very, very 
low since the end of the cold war. See, there 
was a long period of quietness or not much of 
any activity since the time of the atmospheric 
test ban in 1963. There was a huge anti-nucle¬ 
ar movement before that and leading up to that 
and causing that - the partial test ban - but then 
people got the feeling that the danger has gone 
away somehow and it hadn’t by any means. But 
there wasn’t a whole lot of activity until, as I say, 
the late 70’s and we were definitely on the cut¬ 
ting edge of that activity at Rocky Flats. And I 


think Rocky Flats came to be in the course of 
the year very well known as a focus, as an ex¬ 
ample of activism against nuclear weapons and 
that lasted for a number of years, but then the ef¬ 
fect of the ending of the cold war was like the at¬ 
mospheric test ban. People have acted ever since, 
on the whole, really as if the nuclear danger to 

the world had disap¬ 
peared or at least was 
in the process of disap¬ 
pearing, which is just 
as good as far as peo¬ 
ples’ own involvement 
is concerned. It’s be¬ 
ing taken care of, you 
know, it’s going away 
or it has gone away. 

JD: Not unlike the 
environmental move¬ 
ment after Clinton and 
Gore got elected. Al¬ 
most immediately the 
environmental movement lost steam. For envi¬ 
ronmentalists there was no longer a boogie man 
in the White Flouse so there was no real risk any 
more. It was, as you say, being taken care of. 

DE: I wasn’t so involved in that, I was a 
sympathetic observer. I didn’t realize . . . but 
that makes sense. You would expect that 
things would be taken care of once Gore got 
in, especially after he had just written his 
book Earth in the Balance. But essentially 
nothing came of it once he was in the White 
Flouse because Clinton chose to sit on it. I 
think if Gore had been president - then or 
later, he would have done more about it but 
he did very little as Vice President. 

JD: But it’s a direct corollary to what you are 
talking about with the anti-nuclear weapons 


PEOPLE HAVE ACTED 
EVER SINCE AS IF THE 
NUCLEAR DANGER TO 
THE WORLD HAD DISAP¬ 
PEARED OR, AT LEAST, 
WAS IN THE PROCESS OF 
DISAPPEARING, WHICH 
IS JUST AS GOOD AS 
FAR AS MOST PEOPLE'S 
OWN INVOLVEMENT IS 
CONCERNED. 


142 


A CRITICALITY 

movement. It is exactly the same thing. 

DE: Yeah, after all, remember the nuclear win¬ 
ter phenomenon which was of extreme impor¬ 
tance as reported in the early 80’s .. ‘82, ‘83, ‘84. 

JD: Sure. 

DE: But the cold war was still on and when 
the cold war ended in ‘89, ‘90 - to some extent 
because of this effect - Gorbachev stated that 
he was personally very influenced by the nucle¬ 
ar winter findings and his feeling that we had 
to reduce and really get rid of nuclear weapons, 
which he’s still saying. 

JD: Right. 

DE: But then with the cold war over, people 
thought, “the problem has gone now.” It hasn’t at 
all. So I was arrested a couple of times just about 
a year ago protesting Minuteman launchings at 
Vandenberg Air Force Base and people were ask¬ 
ing me, “Minuteman launchings? We still have 
land-based missiles?” 

It’s like, “Rocky Flats 
builds nuclear weap¬ 
ons?! What?” 

JD: Yeah, I know 
it’s amazing, memory 
half-life . . . 

DE: People are not 
even aware that we 
have 450 Minuteman 
missiles still, which we now know are more than 
enough to cause a nuclear winter. Thirty years 
ago they thought it would take a lot more than 
that but the recent findings by some people who 
were involved in this from the beginning, like 
Alan Robock and Brian Toon, they have data 
now just in the last few years that the nuclear 
winter problem is much more serious than even 
they realized. They now have powerful enough 
computers that can carry on the analysis of the 


OF CONSCIENCE 

long-term effects beyond one year and they find 
that, in nuclear winter, it’s the smoke from burn¬ 
ing cities that could block out the sunlight, not 
entirely, but enough to kill the harvests and 
starve everyone, most species - a few humans 
would probably survive because we are so 
adaptable, but most other species, large species, 
will be gone, and actually most humans will be 
gone. And that can be done by the 450 Minute- 
man missiles alone. 

So, I’ve written several op-eds on this - always 
conscious of, you know, that people aren’t, at this 
point, aware of it at all. We don’t have a move¬ 
ment that can really run with that and Congress 
. . . there is hardly anybody you can point to in 
Congress who will do something with it. 

JD: Well we did get complacent about it and 
now suddenly we start hearing about Korea 
and Iran. We start hearing that they could con¬ 
ceivably have a nucle¬ 
ar weapon, and use it! 

DE: And of course, 
you know, any use 
of nuclear weapons, 
really, any first-use 
can lead to escala¬ 
tion, that is to say, 
any use is crazy. You 
have to be crazy to 
do it. Unfortunately, it’s a kind of normal 
craziness for certain state leaders. So they are 
able to be credible with their threats of nu¬ 
clear weapons by appearing to be that crazy, 
but some of them have to pretend and, you 
know, bluff to some extent. Unfortunately, 
Kim Jong-Un we don’t know enough about, 
he has an easier task at appearing crazy than 
leaders of some other states... 

JD: Yeah, that seems apparent. 


PEOPLE ARE NOT EVEN 
AWARE THAT WE STILL 
HAVE 450 MINUTEMAN 
MISSILES, WHICH WE 
NOW KNOW ARE MORE 
THAN ENOUGH TO CAUSE 
A NUCLEAR WINTER. 


143 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


DE: You raised the question, “what is the rogue 
state threat and what is the terrorist threat.” 
They are both real, but what I think people are 
quite misled about is believing that is the only 
danger that we face and that our own nuclear 
policies are no problem, which couldn’t be more 
wrong. I think the chance of stopping prolifer¬ 
ation, which is very, very important and which 
the terrorist threat is tied to because the more 
proliferation you get the more likely it is that ter¬ 
rorists will buy, steal, 
or hijack a weapon be¬ 
ing transported or be¬ 
ing sold by some rogue 
state, so the two things 
go together. There is es¬ 
sentially no chance of 
stopping proliferation 
while the U.S. main¬ 
tains a doomsday ma¬ 
chine with thousands, well let’s say fifteen hun¬ 
dred weapons to be very precise, on alert. And 
the Russians do the same. Each of us can end life 
on earth by hitting cities with a fraction of those 
forces, a small fraction. And saying to other peo¬ 
ple, “stop having one weapon” - while we say 
we need and have a right to hundreds and thou¬ 
sands of warheads is absurd. We have no lever¬ 
age on that at all. 

JD: So does that in itself make the idea of 
non-proliferation dead? 

DE: With our current policies, and the ex¬ 
ample we are setting, and Russia is setting at 
the same time, I think you could say there is 
no real non-proliferation policy. And of course 
it is getting cheaper and easier for other coun¬ 
tries as they acquire plutonium from their nu¬ 
clear energy programs. 

JD: So do need an entirely new policy here? 


DE: What I’m saying, is we can’t stop prolif¬ 
eration by our own efforts all by ourselves, but 
we can stop promoting proliferation, which is 
actually what we are doing. I don’t think you 
can avoid more proliferation and reduce terror¬ 
ist attacks while we maintain our present poli¬ 
cies. A necessary, not a sufficient, but a neces¬ 
sary condition for addressing those risks is for 
us to stop threatening nuclear war ourselves. 

We don’t have a no-first-use policy, we re¬ 
ject that every time it 
comes up. And for us 
to maintain a huge ar¬ 
senal, enough to de¬ 
stroy life on earth - we 
and the Russians both 
have that capability - 
no human should have 
that power. 

JD: But is it even re¬ 
alistic to assume that the United States will ac¬ 
tually consider reducing our arsenal? 

DE: Oh yes, I do think that there is a real 
possibility or I wouldn’t be spending my life 
as I am here now. There is a real possibility 
of getting radical reduction. Not elimination 
but radical reduction. And by that I mean not 
down to a thousand warheads, which is what 
President Obama is proposing now, which 
is still far more than enough to end life on 
earth. I mean a reduction that goes down ten 
times more than that, down to the level of 
other states, of a hundred warheads or less 
than that. 

JD: Is that enough do you think, in most peo¬ 
ple’s minds, to serve as a deterrent? 

DE: [Laughs] How many weapons do you 
think it would take to deter us? How many 
weapons did Saddam need to deter us, the 


HOW MANY WEAPONS DO 
YOU THINK IT WOULD 
TAKE TO DETER US? HOW 
MANY WEAPONS DID 
SADDAM NEED TO DETER 
US, THE MOST POWERFUL 
STATE IN THE WORLD? 


144 


A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


most powerful state in the world? Did he need 
a hundred? 

JD:I don’t know, but there’s a perception... 

DE: No, ask yourself. To keep us from in¬ 
vading Iraq, did he need a thousand warheads 
against our cities? Did he need a hundred? 
Did he need fifty? Think about it, what did 
he think? 

JD: Well, I guess all he really needed was one. 

DE: One is good. But you might say if you 
know where it is or think you know where it 
is, you might count on getting rid of it. Ten 
would be safer. Not that you need ten. But just 
so some will survive. 

JD: Right. 

DE: It’s about what we think North Korea 
has. By the way, we don’t even know if they 
have actual weapons. They have material for 
about ten weapons. We don’t know if they have 
managed to put one on a vehicle. But I’d say 
we are pretty well de¬ 
terred from a big at¬ 
tack on North Korea. 

JD: I hope we are. 

I get a sense we’re 
safer under Obama, 
but maybe that’s just 
wishful thinking 

DE: And that’s the 
thing. Kim Jong-Un 
has ten possible weap¬ 
ons. That gives you 
pretty good deter¬ 
rence. Clinton was close to attacking North 
Korea in 1994 - when they had none. Really 
close - not just threatening - in order to keep 
them from having any weapons, and then they 
got a deal. Once they got the weapons we didn’t 
see George W. Bush or Barack Obama talking 


about attacking North Korea anymore unless 
they attack us, which they can’t even attack us, 
but unless they attack somebody. The idea of 
just attacking them has gone now. 

So, that’s another way we are promoting pro¬ 
liferation by our willingness to attack non-nucle¬ 
ar states like Iraq or Iran and not states that have 
a few nuclear weapons. That’s a pretty good in¬ 
ducement to get nuclear weapons if they can do 
it without getting attacked. And a lot of coun¬ 
tries could do that without getting attacked, 
Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Taiwan. 

So, as I say, in a number of ways we’re ac¬ 
tually promoting that, not only by our nucle¬ 
ar threats, and we are making nuclear threats 
to Iran right now - even under Obama - when 
it comes to threats of attack and the fact that 
only a nuclear weapon can assure that we will 
get their underground, deep underground sites. 
As recent studies have shown, you can’t be sure 

you’ve destroyed ev¬ 
erything except with a 
nuclear weapon. 

So in June of 2008 
when Bush said that if 
diplomacy fails to deter 
Iran from developing 
its nuclear program, 
then “all options are 
on the table,” he was 
asked if that included 
a nuclear attack and he 
repeated, “all options 
are on the table.” So, Barack Obama has not re¬ 
treated from that position at all. Now I don’t 
think he would be as quick to do it, in fact I think 
he would be very reluctant to do it compared to 
Cheney or George W. Bush, or I think Romney 
or McCain, but that doesn’t mean it’s impossible. 


IN 1988 BUSH SAID 
THAT IF DIPLOMACY 
FAILS TO DETER IRAN 
FROM DEVELOPING ITS 
NUCLEAR PROGRAM, THEN 
“ALL OPTIONS ARE ON 
THE TABLE" BARACK 
OBAMA HAS NOT 
RETREATED FROM THAT 
POSITION AT ALL. 


145 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


I urged people to vote for Obama despite all 
these things wrong with his policy. I agree with 
all of his critics essentially, his left-wing critics, 
and yet I urged people to vote for him in swing 
states because I think Romney would have been 
even worse. I think with Romney in there or 
McCain in there, we would be at war with Iran 
right now, and it wouldn’t be over either, and we 
might have used nuclear weapons right now. 

Unfortunately when I say what do I think of 
Obama, I think it’s possible with Obama. It’s a 
difference between a high likelihood and a low 
likelihood. But it’s not zero with Obama and 
to say that is to be extremely critical. You ask 
about his policy in general, it could be worse. 
And it would be worse with Romney or Mc¬ 
Cain I think, not to speak of the other candi¬ 
dates. It would be worse, but under Obama it’s 
still terrible. I think his 
goal, his promise of 
the world without nu¬ 
clear weapons, is hot 
air. Nothing, it means 
nothing. He has made 
no progress in that di¬ 
rection whatever. To 
go from 1,500 war¬ 
heads to 1,000 is to go 
from nuclear winter to 
nuclear winter. It has 
no significant effect if 
a war were to occur. Now if you were going 
down to one hundred or less I would say now 
he’s getting somewhere. Now he’s talking and 
that’s enough to have enormous effects, though 
it would still be disastrous. 

I don’t know if you are aware of this, but Ro- 
bock and Toon, and others, have now shown, 
in published scientific studies, the effects of a 


war between Pakistan and India using just one 
hundred Hiroshima type weapons, that is, the 
kind of weapons that now are just the trigger 
for thermonuclear weapons. Weapons “only” 
the size of the pits they used to make at Rocky 
Flats, right? A Nagasaki, not a Hiroshima, but 
a Nagasaki weapon, a plutonium one. Fifty 
each for India and Pakistan, one hundred all 
together, would cause enough smoke to reduce 
sunlight - not enough to cause nuclear winter - 
but enough to cause a billion people to starve. 
Have you heard that? 

JD: I haven’t heard that but just the sound 
of it... 

DE: Hardly anybody is aware of it, but what 
I’m saying is that one hundred Rocky Flats 
trigger size weapons, plutonium pits, could 
give you that effect. It would be a seven per¬ 
cent reduction in sun¬ 
light globally, which 
will shorten growing 
seasons, freeze a lot 
of harvests, and do so 
enough to kill off the 
billion, nine-hundred 
million to be precise, 
people who are al¬ 
ready on the edge of 
starvation. 

That’s one hundred 
smaller weapons. So, 
when I say getting down to a hundred thermo¬ 
nuclear weapons [which are 6 to 30 times larg¬ 
er] on submarines, I’m not talking about some¬ 
thing that is close to elimination, it isn’t. But it’s 
a lot better than nuclear winter. Nuclear winter 
would kill seven billion people. So, one billion, 
better than seven billion, right? But anything 
like that is still immoral, outrageous, terrible, 


THERE SHOULD BE AN 
ANTI-NUCLEAR WEAPONS 
MOVEMENT... RIGHT NOW... 

THAT WORKS TOWARD 
GLOBAL ELIMINATION OF 
NUCLEAR WEAPONS, NOT 
IN DECADES AS OBAMA 
HAS PUT IT. BUT SOON¬ 
ER THAN THAT. WITHIN 
MONTHS OR YEARS. 


146 


A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


intolerable and should be ended. But that’s not 
the direction we are going in. 

JD: So then, shouldn’t there be a modern an¬ 
ti-nuclear weapons movement? 

DE: Yes, there should be an anti-nuclear 
weapons movement. Right now! One that 
works toward global elimination of nucle¬ 
ar weapons, yes, but 
not in centuries as 
John Kerry has put 
it, and not in decades 
as Obama has put it, 
but sooner than that 

- within months or 
years. I would say 
we should be aim¬ 
ing on the same scale 
as the occupation of 
Wall Street move¬ 
ment or Rocky Flats 
on a much bigger scale to ensure that no 
state has a doomsday machine. No person, 
no state should have the ability to cause nu¬ 
clear winter, it seems to me. Again, no state 
should have a doomsday machine as we do 
and the Russians do and actually the Brit¬ 
ish and French come close to having. The 
Israelis could do it. So, we need radical re¬ 
ductions on a scale of magnitude larger, ten 
times more radical, than anything we’re 
proposing right now. Down to the level of 

- like North Korea frankly. There is no ex¬ 
cuse for living with any person or state hav¬ 
ing the ability to end life on earth. I don’t 
think that is very controversial, if you put it 
that way. It doesn’t sound radical to me. But 
what people don’t realize is that the possi¬ 
bility of nuclear winter exists right now and 
it’s not going away soon. It won’t go away 


ever unless there is the kind of dedication we 
saw at Rocky Flats on a very large scale and 
that’s not coming tomorrow or next month. 
It will take a while to grow from nothing, 
but that’s what I’m working at. 

JD: But how would this work? How could 
you get a movement, a public movement, a 

social movement in 
the United States to 
radically cut back on 
our weapons? How 
would you make that 
happen in Russia at 
the same time? 

DE: First of all that 
would have been no 
problem at all under 
Gorbachev and Yelt¬ 
sin. They were both 
proposing it. Now 
Putin is going in a different direction at this 
time and directly referring to our example. 
He’s basically basing his current policies on 
Eisenhower’s old New Look policy of de¬ 
pending on nuclear weapons, rather than a 
large regular army. Bigger bang for the buck! 
Putin can’t afford conventional forces any¬ 
more in Russia, so he’s going to rely on nu¬ 
clear weapons. Well, he’s just imitating us in 
that, but in the past they have been ahead of us. 
They can’t even afford their nuclear forces. So, 
I think getting them down is not going to be a 
real problem. It’ll be more of a problem - to be 
very specific and frank here - it will be more 
of a problem this year than it would have been 
five or ten years ago because of the direction 
they’re going. But if we were to lead the way in 
the other direction, I seriously do not think that 
it would be a problem at all. 


THERE IS NO EXCUSE 
OF LIVING WITH ANY 
PERSON OR STATE 
HAVING THE ABILITY TO 
END LIFE ON EARTH. I 
DON'T THINK THAT IS 
VERY CONTROVERSIAL, 
IF YOU PUT IT THAT 
WAY. IT DOESN'T SOUND 
RADICAL TO ME. 


147 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


JD: But the impetus has to come from the 
public, right? I mean it really has to be a social 
movement. 

DE: Yeah. I wish it were possible in Rus¬ 
sia. They could lead the way and really, they 
did have a pretty good movement going un¬ 
der Gorbachev and 
to some extent un¬ 
der Yeltsin, but Pu¬ 
tin has pretty much 
closed those move¬ 
ments down publicly, 
not entirely, but he’s 
acting hard to nail 
things down there. 

And we’ve been go¬ 
ing in that direction, 
too, with Obama’s war on whistleblowers. 
But this is the country I think that could lead 
the way in that direction and I do think there 
is a possibility. 

Frankly, it’s a small possibility and when I say 
that, I’m also saying I think there is small possi¬ 
bility that the human species will get away with 
the invention of nuclear weapons. Small possi¬ 
bility that we’ll survive it. Now, a small possibil¬ 
ity is a lot better than none and our goal has to 
be to increase that low probability as much as we 
can. The obstacles are against us and the odds are 
against us, but it can be done. And the stakes are 
all life on earth, except for bacteria and viruses and 
some things that probably would survive a decade 
of nuclear winter, but all the mammals, all the pri¬ 
mates and nearly all the humans would disappear 
the way things are going. Because the weapons 
will spread and there will be terrorist attacks, po¬ 
lice measures in all countries will be much more 
severe. The chance of a movement correcting this 
trend will be less, I think, in ten years than they are 


right now in this country and in other countries, so 
the time to use our freedoms is right now. 

JD: Thank you Dan. That was amazing, and 
enlightening, and very sobering. One last ques¬ 
tion, what would you like readers to take away 
from re-releasing of A Year of Disobedience} 

DE: I would - and 
this may sound self- 
serving - but it’s not, 
because what I’m go¬ 
ing to suggest is that 
people read my tes¬ 
timony in the court¬ 
room [page 59], be¬ 
cause I was saying 
things in that testi¬ 
mony that were near¬ 
ly all top secret. The things that I revealed in 
the testimony section of your original book 
about the scale of devastation to be expect¬ 
ed - and that was before I knew of nuclear 
winter or anybody did. It was 1978 and nu¬ 
clear winter wasn’t even suggested for anoth¬ 
er four years - no, I was talking about six- 
hundred million people being killed by our 
own weapons and I’m talking about the fact 
that the authority to use those weapons had 
been delegated by the President to lower-level 
commanders in a number of circumstances. 
That was top secret, and much of it still is top 
secret. That’s the little secret I’ll tell you right 
now. That’s in your book. I was doing that 
because I thought that having tried to put 
that message across and being willing to put 
it out in the mainstream interest, I thought 
if I said that under oath in a trial maybe it 
would get more attention. It didn’t. 

It’s all still valid, though. Yes, everything 
I said in there is still valid and much of it is 


I THINK THERE IS 
SMALL POSSIBILITY 
THAT THE HUMAN 
SPECIES WILL GET AWAY 
WITH THE INVENTION 
OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS. 
SMALL POSSIBILITY 
THAT WE'LL SURVIVE IT. 


148 


A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


still secret, frankly. So I would recommend that 
people look at that. It’s in this book. I’m not 
just talking about Rocky Flats but specifical¬ 
ly that testimony and what I had to say about 
civil disobedience is also very relevant, and as 
we are reminded by “Occupy Wall Street.” It 
so happens that what I’m working on now is a 
book with a tentative title, a memoir called The 
American Doomsday Machine - Confessions of 
a Nuclear War Planner and that’s what I was. 
But my testimony at the Rocky Flats trial had 
the quality, the effect 
of a confession when 
I acknowledged in 
the testimony that 
I myself was a par¬ 
ticipant in that kind 
of planning, and 
that’s a very, very 
heavy confession. So 
I think your book is 
extremely timely and 
it’s an essential tool for helping grow the kind 
of movement that may save life on this planet. 

Just weeks after this interview the world was 
stunned by news of U.S. surveillance programs 
far more extensive and potentially “Orwellian” 
in nature than previously known. The disclo¬ 
sures were revealed in a whistleblowing event 
by Edward Snowden, a contract employee 
working for the National Security Agency. 

This prompted a powerful response from 
Daniel Ellsberg, which was as remarkable in its 
delivery as it was in its content. “I asked Dan 
one question and then sat back and listened to 
a 35-minute-long, stream-of-consciousness re¬ 
sponse that was simply incredible,” recalled 
Joseph Daniel. “Here it is, almost verbatim.” 


JD: Wow Dan, here we are again, only a 
short while since we last spoke! As arguably the 
world’s most famous whistleblower of all-time 
- with the release of the Pentagon Papers - you 
must be finding yourself suddenly quite popu¬ 
lar again after Edward Snowden’s disclosures. 

DE: Yes, it’s been an incredibly busy last few 
days; my phone has been ringing non-stop with 
calls from media all over the world. I guess if 
they can’t talk to Snowden directly, the Pentagon 
Papers guy is the next best thing. 

JD: Well you are 
certainly the most 
logical and relevant 
guy for comment as 
the Pentagon Pa¬ 
pers disclosure was 
just as significant 
of an event. 

But what inter¬ 
ests me even more 
is that you were in 
effect being a whistleblower again during the 
Rocky Flats trials by revealing the scale of 
devastation to be accepted in a very possible 
first-use or retaliation of nuclear force, and 
by exposing the remarkable chain of author¬ 
ity (or non-authority, if you will) that existed 
for the use of such a nuclear weapon. 

Now, once again, major league whistle¬ 
blowers against the government are in the 
news, first with Bradley Manning and the 
Wikileaks trial, and most recently with this 
Edward Snowden and NSA event. Is it pos¬ 
sible to tie all of this back together with what 
was going on at Rocky Flats in 1978? Is there 
a connection between these kinds of actions? 

DE: You know, at first look there doesn’t 
seem to be a lot of linkage between Rocky Flats 


I'M TALKING ABOUT THE 
FACT THAT THE AUTHORITY 
TO USE THOSE [NUCLEAR] 
WEAPONS HAD BEEN DELE¬ 
GATED BY THE PRESIDENT 
TO [HIS] LOWER-LEVEL 
COMMANDERS IN A NUMBER 
OF CIRCUMSTANCES. 


149 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


and the Bradley Manning whistleblowing on 
the Iraq and Afghan wars - which has so much 
in common with my Pentagon Papers disclo¬ 
sure - and Edward Snowden who is blowing 
the whistle on the extra-constitutional actions 
that NSA is taking to institute the infrastruc¬ 
ture of a police state here. 

Yet, with some reflection, I’ve come to see 
there’s a great deal in common between whis¬ 
tleblowing and civil disobedience, and in fact 
the very subject matter of Rocky Flats. You 
have a very dangerous situation to the larger 
community. In the case of Rocky Flats, that 
community is the world, with the threat posed 
by the doomsday machines that are still on 
alert in the U.S. and Russia. In that respect one 
could say that our actions at Rocky Flats have 
not yet had the effect of protecting the world. 

I didn’t think of that action at Rocky Flats 
as whistleblowing, in 
fact it wasn’t a term 
very much in use at 
the time, and when it 
was there was more of 
a negative conotation 
than there is today. 

And yet this very 
question of yours has 
disclosed to me, for 
the first time it seems in 40 years, the very close 
relationship between whistleblowing and civil 
disobedience. Both are intended to warn a larg¬ 
er community about a grave danger, and/or a 
moral danger, a situation of recklessness, per¬ 
haps of law-breaking, perhaps a danger to our 
constitutional form of democracy, or simply a 
murderous policy. 

Civil disobedience is whistleblowing from 
within that larger community. It’s generally per¬ 


formed by people who are not in a position of 
authority and who don’t have any official po¬ 
sition of warning their neighbors. Yet they are 
doing something very much out of the ordinary, 
at some cost or risk to themselves, to wake up 
that community to the danger that is confront¬ 
ing it. The civil disobedience person does his or 
her warning by defying some law or norm of the 
community and exposing themselves to arrest. 

The whistleblower is from within the author¬ 
ities themselves, who may be perpetrating that 
danger, or that lawless, reckless behavior. Again, 
it involves breaking through a norm. The whis¬ 
tleblower is also exposing themselves to prose¬ 
cution - prosecution for speaking out, prosecu¬ 
tion for breaking silence, prosecution for telling 
secrets, prosecution for breaking a promise; in¬ 
deed, a promise to their teammates or colleagues, 
but in order to warn the larger community of 

which their colleagues 
are actually a part. 

In both cases you are 
involved in this warn¬ 
ing behavior, in break¬ 
ing a norm that usual¬ 
ly isn’t perceived as a 
norm or a law as it is 
beneath consciousness 
in that respect. It’s ac¬ 
tually a norm of silence, a norm of indifference, 
or passivity, or obedience. It is something that 
tells you what not to do, what not to care about, 
who not to care about, what not to pay attention 
to. By speaking up against that norm of confor¬ 
mity of silence, by speaking up and speaking out, 
and making a nuisance of yourself, or an em¬ 
barrassment, or even being seen as a lawbreaker, 
you hope to break this dangerous sort of sleep¬ 
walking on the edge of a cliff. 


THERE'S A GREAT DEAL 
IN COMMON BETWEEN 
WHISTLEBLOWING AND 
CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE, 
AND IN FACT THE VERY 
SUBJECT MATTER OF 
ROCKY FLATS. 


150 


A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


That’s what we had with Rocky Flats, and we 
did wake people up, for a while. But then we 
were lost to the hypnotic influence of authori¬ 
ties for whom it was more convenient to keep 
the populous asleep to 
the danger, than to act 
to diminish that dan¬ 
ger itself. The public 
slips back into their 
normal conformity, 
and silence, and indif¬ 
ference, and passivity. 

In the situation with 
Snowden, we’ve seen the extraordinary action 
of someone within the most highly-trusted and 
cleared part of the authority structure, trusted 
to keep silent, to keep from talking out about 
certain things that are being held “most secret,” 
protected by a series of clearances, each of them 
higher than “top secret.” He was definitely ex¬ 
posing himself to prosecution for doing that. 
And yet, raising the question for the first time in 
the courts - if and when it gets into the courts, 
as it almost surely will, unless he is extralegal- 
ly assassinated, quite frankly, or kidnapped - of 
whether it can really be regarded as criminal to 
reveal programs blatantly violating the Fourth 
Amendment and its restraint on government in¬ 
tervention with our private affairs. These are ac¬ 
tions that have, in the last few years, been legal¬ 
ized with the ignorant and indifferent agreement 
of the legislature and the public. 

So I would say the Fourth Amendment 
is very clearly being violated here by what 
Snowden has revealed in the form of the col¬ 
lection of data on all of our electronic commu¬ 
nications, all of our email, our Facebook, our 
social media involvement, chat rooms, cred¬ 
it card transactions, online banking transac¬ 


tions, and the electronic identification of our 
whereabouts every moment of the day if we’re 
carrying a GPS enabled Smartphone. 

For corporations to have that kind of infor¬ 
mation on us, which 
we give them for our 
convenience, is now 
shown to be more 
dangerous than peo¬ 
ple realized. But we’ve 
accepted that because 
it really only exposed 
us to ads that we 
might or might not want to see. 

But for the government to have that infor¬ 
mation, for political figures who constitute the 
government to have that information, exposes 
us to a kind of manipulation and essentially 
blackmail and coercion, that makes free asso¬ 
ciation and free speech of the First Amend¬ 
ment virtually out of our reach, impossible. It 
really negates democracy. It puts real democ¬ 
racy in danger, to say the least, and possibly 
impossible as time goes on. 

I feel that Snowden has done us a tremendous 
benefit here, in the form of his civil disobedi¬ 
ence against the norms of Booz Allen Hamilton 
and the norms of the National Security Agency, 
the internal rules that are not only a condition 
of his employment, but have actually been en¬ 
acted into law. He’s telling us communications 
intelligence operational data against which 
there is a clear-cut law - The Communications 
Intelligence Act, 18 U.S.C. 798 - to sanction 
what he’s done. He’s exposed himself to a life in 
prison, if not to even more life-threatening acts 
by the government against him, since the presi¬ 
dent has claimed the right, without challenge, 
to assassinate American citizens anywhere in 


HE'S EXPOSED HIMSELF 
TO A LIFE IN PRISON, 
IF NOT TO EVEN MORE 
LIFE-THREATENING ACTS 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
AGAINST HIM. 


151 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


the world that he regards as suspicious in his 
eyes of aiding an enemy. All it takes to do that 
with a president is to threaten his own policies, 
and his own view of what’s best in the world. 

So Snowden is in some physical danger now, 
and facing the likelihood of a very long prison 
sentence, as Bradley Manning is today - and 
as I was 40 years earlier. Each of us then act¬ 
ing patriotically as we saw it, as we tried to 
be, in warning our country of what was being 
done secretly. So we have in common that we 
consciously exposed ourselves to life in pris¬ 
on, while at the same time being recognized by 
many people as having acted well, as having 
done the right thing in order to alert them to 
dangers that were being kept secret from them. 

Thanks to our ac¬ 
tion at Rocky Flats 
the people of Denver 
were alerted to the lo¬ 
cal hazard of fires or 
accidents that could 
have forced the evacu¬ 
ation of the entire city. 

And moreover, they 
eventually became in¬ 
formed of long-term 
contamination that will never go away. 

This contibuted to the Nuclear Freeze move¬ 
ment of the early ‘80s, which did bring us the 
first serious measures of nuclear arms control, 
and which definitely drew on the example and 
to some extent the very people who had taken 
part in the Rocky Flats civil disobedience. 

But the global threat represented by Rocky 
Flats still exists, in the form of missiles on sub¬ 
marines and in silos, on alert, in both the US 
and in Russia. Almost all of those weapons in 
the U.S. still have a “pit” or plutonium trigger 


that was made at Rocky Flats. This is a threat 
that will remain until the public in America 
causes its Congress to wake up and take the ac¬ 
tions open to it against this danger. 

The danger is also in Russia. We are endan¬ 
gered by those missiles on alert in Russia. The 
one world leader who actually saw that dan¬ 
ger clearly, in my opinion, was Gorbachev. 
But he lost office, partly by a coup and part¬ 
ly by disillusionment with his economic poli¬ 
cies. That was a great loss for the world and it 
removed Russia from the likelihood of taking 
the initiative on removing this danger. More¬ 
over they’ve moved away from democracy. 
The situation is not as bad as it was before 
Gorbachev, but it’s moving in that direction. 

We still have the 
forms of democracy 
at least, but yet what 
Snowden has shown 
us, in part by what 
he’s revealed, is how 
far we’ve lost sub¬ 
stantive democracy 
in that Congress is 
no longer perform¬ 
ing the function of 
oversight, and of checks and balances against 
Executive power that the constitution meant it 
to have. He’s also revealed that the Fisa Court, 
the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, 
that was set up as a judicial check on execu¬ 
tive abuse and usurpation of power has become 
what one former NSA analyst has called, “a 
kangaroo court with a rubber stamp.” 

We find that of tens of thousands of requests 
for intrusion into someone’s private affairs by 
the FBI, made to that court, only 6 to 11 re¬ 
quests have been modified or refused. So in oth- 


WE FIND THAT OF TENS 
OF THOUSANDS OF RE¬ 
QUESTS FOR INTRUSION 
INTO SOMEONE'S PRIVATE 
AFFAIRS BY THE FBI, 
MADE TO THAT COURT, 
ONLY 6 TO 11 REQUESTS 
HAVE BEEN ...REFUSED. 


152 


A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


er words, that reform that came out of the Sen¬ 
ator Church investigation of the intelligence 
community in 1975 and ’76 is a failure, espe¬ 
cially since 9/11 and perhaps before that. It is no 
check at all. So we have no judicial check. 

Another reform that came out of the Church 
Committee hearings was the very existence 
of the intelligence committees in Congress to 
oversee the intelligence community. That too 
has been shown to be essentially a failure as 
a congressional check on the executive branch. 
The committees have been co-opted; they have 
been threatened with loss of their own privileg¬ 
es of secret knowledge if they were to tell the 
truth about what they 
have learned. 

And it’s clear here 
that this unconstitu¬ 
tional overreaching 
was blessed or tolerat¬ 
ed by the intelligence 
committees and spe¬ 
cifically by the leader¬ 
ship of both parties. In short, we have not three 
independent branches of government as was 
designed over 200 years ago; we have execu¬ 
tive government, going so far as to allow the 
president to be judge, jury, prosecutor and even 
executioner of American citizens, like Anwar 
al-Awlaki and his son, both in Yemen far from 
any known battlefield, without any due process 
whatever involving the judiciary. So that’s sin¬ 
gle-branch government, virtually the definition 
of tyranny in the words of James Madison. 

The danger to democracy that has been re¬ 
vealed here by Snowden is not yet apparent to 
many Americans. They see what NSA is doing as 
obviously an intrusion on their privacy, but on 
second thought most people are willing to ac¬ 


cept that intrusion on the grounds that it pro¬ 
tects them from terrorism; that’s what the gov¬ 
ernment tells them. The leaders in Congress are 
telling them, “This is a wonderful process we’re 
carrying out for your benefit, and we didn’t hap¬ 
pen to mention it to you before, in fact we kept 
it totally secret,” for reasons they’re not really 
spelling out, “but believe us, it’s for your own 
good. Trust us.” And unfortunately, I think at 
this time a large number of Americans are will¬ 
ing to accept that assurance, and to trust them. 

But they shouldn’t, and the reason is this: 
Many Americans are saying, “I don’t have any¬ 
thing to hide from the government, so why 

should I worry if the 
government has this 
information on me?” 
And the answer to 
that is, “Are you that 
sure that your repre¬ 
sentatives in Congress, 
and your judges in the 
courts, have nothing 
to hide individually and together?” 

Because, the fact is, we’re learning that the 
government has every detail of the private life, 
not only every one of its citizens who have elec¬ 
tronic equipment but on every one of their 
Congressional representatives and every one of 
their judges. And to think that that information 
will not, in future, be abused to destroy the in¬ 
dependence of Congress and of the courts from 
executive branch blackmail is naive. 

Interestingly, I noticed, that Republicans 
who approved of these measures when they 
became public under Bush, now a majority 
of those Republicans have come to distrust 
those same actions under Obama. And exact¬ 
ly the same is true for Democrats (including 


ARE YOU THAT SURE 
THAT YOUR REPRESEN¬ 
TATIVES IN CONGRESS, 
AND YOUR JUDGES IN 
THE COURTS, HAVE 
NOTHING TO HIDE? 


153 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


one named Barrack Obama) who denounced 
this intrusion into privacy when it was done 
by Bush and are now practicing it, as in the 
case of Obama, or approving it, as in the case 
of the people who voted for Obama. 

In one way that looks simply partisan and 
hypocritical, but from another point of view 
it’s rather realistic in the following sense. Each 
of these people is showing their awareness that 
those powers can be abused, and their fear and 
expectation even that they will be abused, un¬ 
der someone of the opposite party. The Demo¬ 
crats fear they will be abused by a Republican, 
the Republicans fear they will be abused by a 
Democrat. Both are right. 

Where they’re wrong is in supposing that a 
president of their own party can be trusted with 
such information and power. And what they 
should wake up to is that whatever their trust in 
the current administration, however misplaced 
it may be - and it is misplaced at the moment, 
not only in the preceding administration - they 
should worry two to four years from now, or 
six to eight years from now how those powers 
are sure to be abused eventually. That’s the re¬ 


ality. And that means if they really put up with 
this lack of checks and balances, and lack of a 
rule of law, they will have lost their liberty and 
their democracy. 

And if Americans - with the original and still 
largest doomsday machine in the world abso¬ 
lutely, unconscionably, still in existence - lose 
their liberty and democracy and their ability 
to speak up against that danger, represented 35 
years ago by Rocky Flats, but represented still 
by thousands of warheads on alert here and in 
Russia, then our species may be in its last days. 

I think that only a real, working, functioning 
democracy in this country, reflecting genuine 
public concern can and might lead the world 
away from the danger that is posed by these 
doomsday machines. What subverts and threat¬ 
ens our democracy, threatens in the slightly lon¬ 
ger run, human survival. 

And I repeat myself here deliberately. With¬ 
out the working of an informed public, in¬ 
formed by a media that is not hamstrung by 
secrecy, and the working of a Congress that is 
not hamstrung by secrecy, and a judiciary that 
is not hamstrung by secrecy - none of which 



154 




A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


we have now - without regaining a functioning 
three-branch democracy and an independent 
and probing fourth estate alerting people to the 
dangers of nuclear war and nuclear winter, our 
very continued existence is in question. 

The protestors at Rocky Flats showed the 
effectiveness of civil disobedience in waking 
people up. Likewise, the whistleblower Bradley 
Manning did that, for example, to the people in 
Tunisia, who were made aware of U.S. knowl¬ 
edge of the corruption of their government by 
the State Department cables that he released, 
and awakened them to non-violent resistance 
that brought down their dictator and made a 
form of democracy possible there. That spread 
immediately to Egypt. That example of civil 
disobedience and nonviolent revolution, aided 
again by revelation of secret cables by Wikile- 
aks from Bradley Manning, led to the over¬ 
throw of the dictator Mubarak. 

And Bradley Manning’s revealing of atrocities 
by American soldiers, which had been kept se¬ 
cret by our own government and had not been 
prosecuted, forced Obama to withdraw troops 
from Iraq after Prime Minister Maliki refused 


to grant them immunity from Iraqi prosecution. 
Tens of thousands of Americans would have 
been in Iraq in the last year, and right now, were 
it not for Bradley Manning taking the risk of 
life imprisonment to disclose that information, 
and some of them would have died. 

Snowden’s revelations have already opened a 
debate here, which the president claims to have 
welcomed, but apparently didn’t want enough 
to have initiated himself. We would not have the 
legislation now on the table to rein in the NSA, 
or the ACLU suit against them, had Snowden 
not sought to open that debate. So again, an ex¬ 
ample of whistleblowing and civil disobedience 
joined together. 

From Rocky Flats to Edward Snowden, these 
examples of civil disobedience are examples of 
civil courage, which is unfortunately extreme¬ 
ly rare, and yet simply necessary, urgent, and 
essential if we are to regain our constitutional 
rights and in turn, act effectively as a real de¬ 
mocracy to free the world of nuclear danger. 


Photographic triptych of the 1983 Encirclement of 
Rocky Flats Demonstration by Michael Pastuer. 



Contact: www.flickr.com/photos/michael-pastur 










A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


WHO THEY ARE 

ACTIVISTS APPENDIX 
COMPILED BY 
AUGUST FREIRICH 

was twelve years away from being born 
when the “year of disobedience” occurred, 
impacting my life-to-be in ways I am still dis¬ 
covering. Growing up I slowly came to under¬ 
stand how unique it is to have a father who was 
friends with a famous poet like Allen Ginsberg, 
and is still friends with anti-nuclear weapons 
icon Daniel Ellsberg. 

My parents didn’t meet until 1982 - one 
might say my dad Evan was a bit too “occupied” 
to pursue dating before then - although my 
mother fondly remembers waving to all the 
people on the tracks, which surely must have 
included my father. 

After finally meeting him (they were intro¬ 
duced to each other by a fellow Truth Force 
member), she, too, got arrested at the plant for 
civil disobedience. In some ways you might say 
that I am a child of the Truth Force. 

Growing up with parents like these, I suppose I 
didn’t have an entirely normal childhood. I remem¬ 
ber going to anti-war protests as early as elementa¬ 
ry school, especially leading up to the Iraq war. My 
earliest attempts at creative writing include devis¬ 
ing slogans to put on signs at protests. 

I have known many Truth Forcers growing 
up in Boulder, people who blend the lines be¬ 
tween friends and family in my life. My oldest 
friends are their children. Far more than simply 
“nukes are bad,” my perspectives on everything 
from recycling to world peace have been cob¬ 


bled together from the guidance of these strong, 
passionate people. They have taught me to be 
conscious of how my actions affect the world at 
large, however small that effect may be. 

Just last year I went to a guest lecture on al¬ 
ternative media at Emerson College in Bos¬ 
ton, now my alma mater. The professor talked 
about billboards he designed early in his career 
as part of the protests at Rocky Flats (see page 
116). Imagine my surprise when 2,000 miles 
from home an image of my father in his Truth 
Force days appeared on the screen looking 
down at me. No matter how far I travel, I will 
never escape the influence of the 1978 Rocky 
Flats occupation, nor do I wish to. 

I jumped at the opportunity to put together 
these biographies of some of the folks involved 
with Rocky Flats, a chance for me to explore 
my parents’ past. I had never before gotten a 
full sense of the passion and sacrifice of the 
Truth Forcers, and experiencing the occupation 
35 years after the fact from the mouths of the 
activists is a memory I will treasure. 

With the help of dad and other members of 
the Truth Force I tried to select a group of peo¬ 
ple who offered variety in their perspectives, 
and in doing so I had to engage in what I call 
the dance of tactful omission. For every person 
I interviewed there were ten more at the occu¬ 
pation, and for every paragraph included there 
are three paragraphs of notes I had to omit. 
To capture the stories of everyone involved 
could take another book, but these biographies 
should serve to provide a brief cross-section of 
the people behind the protests. 

August Freiricb is the son of Evan Freiricb 
and Janet Roberts. Fie recently graduated from 
Emerson College in Boston and plans to move to 
Eos Angeles to pursue a career in screenwriting. 


156 



A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


Elena Klaver - Singer/Songwriter 

While taking classes at the University of Colorado 
in Boulder, Elena was recruited to join in activism 
against Rocky Flats by Ann Swift. 

“She didn’t even know me. I was walking down 
the hallway and she saw me and said ‘Where are you 

going? You need to go 
to this meeting about 
Rocky Flats.’” 

The meeting, held 
by the American 
Friends Service Com¬ 
mittee, marked the 
beginning of Elena’s 
involvement with 
the cause. She got in¬ 
volved in planning the 
events, attending the 
nonviolence training 
and the April demonstration the day after. 

“When Sunday morning came there was a group 
of us that were firm in our convictions to stay and 
not leave as had been planned. We were saying that 
if we’re doing this civil disobedience to stop a global 
threat, why on earth would we stop? I found myself 
in a group of people with shared values that felt like 
we could make a difference.” 

Elena continues to be passionately involved in 
activism. “Eve never been in a really straight, main¬ 
stream job. I’ll always stayed involved in environ¬ 
mental movements, and peace and justice move¬ 
ments. It’s as if once you become awakened about 
something as big as Rocky Flats, you can either 
choose to go back to sleep... or not, and a lot of us 
chose not to.” 

Elena currently lives in Niwot, Colorado and 
works as a Spanish-English interpreter. She is an ac¬ 
complished singer/songwriter musician, and music 
from her album Promise of Spring is embedded in 
the enhanced electronic edition of this book, and can 
be heard and purchased at iTunes or cdbaby.com. 

Elena is an ardent birdwatcher, and also works 
with preteens and teens to bring about positive 
change in a group called Earth Guardians. 


Chet Tchozewski - Coordinator 

Before his involvement in Rocky Flats, Chet lived 
in Georgetown, Colorado working night shifts as a 
paramedic during the construction of the Eisenhower 
tunnel, and skiing during the day. Chet read about the 
civil disobedience training and the subsequent rally 
organized by the American Friends Service Commit¬ 
tee (AFSC), and took a day off of skiing to attend. 

“I had learned enough about the nuclear arms 
race and the environmental threat posed by Rocky 
Flats, so it was a moral and political pull for me.” 
The following week he gave notice that he would 
leave his job as a paramedic. 

“I did an instant pivot in 1978 and have been 
involved in anti-nuclear work for the last 35 years. 
It was important for me to meet the people I did, 
people who were my age and much more politically 
sophisticated, and still they welcomed me in. It had 
social meaning for me.” 

Chet devoted himself to the cause, eventually step¬ 
ping into the role of coordinator for the Truth Force. 
He went on to work with the AFSC as a liaison be¬ 
tween the two organizations from 1979 to 1983, and 

has participated in ac¬ 
tivism ever since. 

“The Truth Force 
truly changed my life, 
everything I’ve done 
in the meantime has 
flowed from that. It’s 
all been about how to 
help social movements 
succeed in making the 
world a better place.” 

Chet, who lives in 
Boulder with his wife 
Susan and their daughter Tian, is one of the found¬ 
ers of the Rocky Mountain Peace and Justice Center, 
and served as the Executive Director of Greenpeace. 
In 1993 he founded Global Greengrants Fund, an 
international environmental foundation that has 
made nearly 50 million dollars in small grants to 
over 7,000 grassroots environmental groups in 128 
developing nations around the globe. 




157 








A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


Brother Sawada - Buddhist Monk 

Born in Fukushima, Japan, a town now infamous 
as an example of nuclear power gone wrong, Sawada 
belongs to a Japanese Buddhist monastic order devot¬ 
ed to world peace and nuclear disarmament. In 1978, 
Sawada came to the United States to make the peace¬ 
ful protest of Rocky Flats his spiritual practice. In the 
months of occupation, the combination of his unique 
garb and consistent drumming helped Sawada stand 
out as a symbol of the diversity in the Truth Force. 

Settling in the mountains outside of Boulder on land 
owned by his friend and fellow Truth Force member 
Tom Morris, Sawada lived in the area for more than 
a decade. He could often be seen wearing saffron and 
white and walking the streets of Boulder drumming 
and chanting a prayer for peace. In this simple but di¬ 
rect way he brought to those around him a conscious¬ 
ness of peace and the threat of nuclear war. At least 
once or twice each week he would walk the eight or 
nine miles to Rocky Flats, drumming and praying as 
he went. Friends and strangers alike were humbled 
by the dedicated manner in which Sawada bore wit¬ 
ness for peace. His dream to see production ended at 

Rocky Flats came to 
fruition and Sawada 
soon left Colorado for 
a new assignment in 
Los Angeles with his 
order. 

Sawada contin¬ 
ues to reside on the 
West Coast with the 
Nipponzan Myohoji 
order. He is still in¬ 
volved in anti-nuclear 
activism at age 61, re¬ 
cently gaining some media attention for protesting 
the San Onofre power plant in southern California. 
Before embarking on a three hour walk, Sawada was 
heard telling his fellow monks “No more Hiroshima. 
No more Nagasaki. No more Three Mile Island. No 
more Fukushima. No more San Onofre.” 


Evan Freirich - Determined Organizer 

In 1978 Evan was studying psychology at the Uni¬ 
versity of Colorado in Boulder when Ann Swift (the 
same local grandmother mentoring a student group 
who had snagged Elena Klaver) recruited him to at¬ 
tend the 1978 demonstration at Rocky Flats. 

“A small group of people stayed overnight at the 
site in protest, but I left early because of hypother¬ 
mia. But I came back the next day and was with the 
Truth Force ever since, becoming its first coordina¬ 
tor. I led a bit of a scorched earth lifestyle at the time 

-1 had a job as a pro¬ 
jectionist at CU along 
with classes, and I just 
stopped going.” 

Since Rocky Flats, 
Evan has continued 
to be passionately 
involved in activism, 
working for the Colo¬ 
rado Environmental 
Coalition, the Great 
Peace March and the 
Nuclear Freeze cam¬ 
paign in New York. Decades later Evan coordinated 
the world’s largest human peace symbol at a demon¬ 
stration in Central Park. 

“Every major decision I’ve made since was affect¬ 
ed by Rocky Flats. It taught me that if I see a wrong 
and I speak to it, I can have an effect. The friendships 
I’ve made at Rocky flats have been some of the most 
important friendships in my life; to this day we still 
support each other.” 

Evan currently lives in the mountains outside of 
Boulder with his wife and son (me!). He works as a 
lawyer and is heavily involved in Community Cycles, 
a nonprofit focused on supporting the biking com¬ 
munity in and around Boulder. 




158 





A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


Judy Danielson and Pam Solo 
Dynamic Duo Organizers 

Working with Citizens Concerned About Radiation 
Pollution, Judy (top) and her colleage Pam (bottom) 
collected baggies of soil from back yards near Rocky 
Flats in the early ‘70s. They presented the samples at 
local political candidate forums, asking that the soil 

be tested for radioac¬ 
tivity. “I don’t think 
they ever got tested, 
but it certainly got the 
point across.” 

The duo were subse¬ 
quently hired to work 
with the American 
Friends Service Com¬ 
mittee (AFSC). They 
founded the Rocky 
Flats Action Group 
(RFAG) which orga¬ 
nized the April, 1978 demonstration at Rocky Flats, 
including the mass nonviolent civil disobedience that 
would spawn the Truth Force. They also helped form 

the Lamm-Wirth Task 
Force to study the haz¬ 
ard of Rocky Flats. 

Judy is currently 
focused on passing 
universal health care 
in Colorado where 
she works as a physi¬ 
cal therapist and lives 
with her husband 
Eric. They have two 
grown daughters. 
Pam’s next endeav¬ 
or was the The Nuclear Freeze Campaign — she then 
represented the Freeze movement internationally 
and helped to found Freeze Voter. 

Author of From Protest to Policy: Beyond the 
Freeze to Common Security, and a recipient of a 
MacArthur Foundation Fellowship, Pam founded 
the Civil Society Institute in 1992, which she contin¬ 
ues to direct. She lives in Boston. 


Roy Young - Wise Inspiration 

At the start of 1978 Roy Young was heavily dedi¬ 
cated to the recycling group EcoCycle, when he 
started attending meetings held by the American 
Friends Service Committee (AFSC) planning the ini¬ 
tial Rocky Flats rally in April. He attended nonvio¬ 
lence training in Golden, and his investment in the 
cause grew from there. 

The AFSC co-operated with Rockwell Interna¬ 
tional in planning a symbolic-only occupation of the 
tracks the night of the rally, an action that grew into 
the “real” Truth Force occupation. “We felt it was 
unacceptable to meet this local hazard and global 
threat with a protest that was temporary and sym¬ 
bolic. The backstory to a lot of this passion tracks 
back to Vietnam. We were too young for most of the 

anti-war protests, and 
Rocky Flats was our 
challenge.” 

Roy wound up 
dropping everything 
to be a part of the 
Truth Force. “As part 
of EcoCycle, having a 
nuclear plant on the 
edge of town seemed 
like total folly. Some 
people got upset that 
I had made a commit¬ 
ment to EcoCycle and then changed course, but I felt 
I had to. They wondered where I’d gone, and maybe 
they knew, but they weren’t happy.” 

Roy’s passion for the environment led him from 
Rocky Flats to the Sierra Club, where he fought ura¬ 
nium mining in the Colorado plateau for a decade. 

Roy has continued pursuing his passions since 
Rocky Flats. “I was already in the mineral and rock 
world in 1973, and the Grand Canyon’s always 
called to me.” 

Roy still lives in Boulder, and has spent the last 20 
years organizing and guiding trips down the Grand 
Canyon. He owns a series of stores called Nature’s 
Own that sell unique rocks and environmental 
themed gifts. 





159 



A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


Marian Doub - Student Activist 

As a junior at Boulder High School in 1978, 
Marian Doub was involved in an activism club 
called All Individuals Responsible (AIR). With in¬ 
sistence from Marian, the group decided to get in¬ 
volved in Rocky Flats. Marian went to her first non¬ 
violence training, and the group attended the April 
1978 demonstration hosted by the American Friends 
Service Committee. 

Coming from activist parents, the rally was only 
the beginning of Marian’s involvement. “The nuclear 

threat was very real 
to me. As a young 
person, that we might 
blow ourselves up 
or poison ourselves 
forever with either a 
nuclear holocaust or 
the fuel cycle was un¬ 
acceptable.” Marian’s 
passion for the cause 
had a strong effect on 
her. Her involvement 
in horseback riding 
and piano lessons dropped off. School remained an 
obstacle in the way of activism, but she circumvent¬ 
ed that, too, graduating from high school early in 
order to organize full-time by turning in independent 
research about the effects of radiation for school 
credit. “Rocky Flats absolutely changed my life.” 

Marian has continued to be heavily involved in ac¬ 
tivism ever since, and now works as a consultant to 
nonprofits in economic justice issues. “I go to other 
people’s actions now. Throughout the 80s and 90s 
and 2000s I was always involved in whatever cam¬ 
paign moved me.” Recently those campaigns includ¬ 
ed Occupy San Francisco and Occupy Bernal, which 
Marian helped found in her neighborhood. 

Marian lives with her husband Bob and their son 
Aidan. They met and fell in love at a Rocky Flats 
Hiroshima/Nagasaki Commemoration action in 
1980, and recently celebrated their 30th wedding 
anniversary by getting arrested doing anti-nuclear 
civil disobedience at Livermore Labs. 


Cliff Kushler - Expert Communicator 

Cliff was living in Lansing, Michigan working 
with Greenpeace in the Great Lakes region when the 
group asked if anyone was interested in joining the 
action at Rocky Flats. 

“My interests back then were multi-faceted,” Cliff 
remembers. His passions ranged from mathematics 
to zoology, and the anti-nuclear efforts appealed to 
him and Lynne Wright, a fellow Greenpeace activist. 
“We had grown up crouching under our desks doing 
duck-and-cover and fearing nuclear holocaust; when 
this came around it seemed like it would be a good 
thing to try and stop.” 

Together, Cliff and Lynne traveled to Rocky Flats 
and joined in planning the initial demonstration and 
the overnight occupation. “I raised my hand at the 
meeting and asked if we should bring tents. They said 
we could just tough it out for one night. I was one of 
only two people who brought a tent, and it snowed!” 

After getting arrested, Cliff returned to Michigan 
to start a graduate degree in Computer Science, but 
he returned to Rocky Flats several times that year to 
appear in court and support the activists there. Cliff’s 

fascination with dol¬ 
phin consciousness 
and their communica¬ 
tion led to a mentor¬ 
ship at the University 
of Michigan and fos¬ 
tered his interest in 
augmented communi¬ 
cation for people with 
disabilities. After earn¬ 
ing a PhD in engineer¬ 
ing at the University of 
Tokyo, Chff reluctant¬ 
ly returned to the United States where his work led to 
the development of T9, a text input method that was 
successfully integrated with cell phones. Cliff moved 
on to co-develop Swype, an input method that has 
proved similarly successful on smartphones. Chff cur¬ 
rently lives in Ananda Village outside of Nevada City, 
California with his wife Willow, and son Chandan. 




160 





A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


Patrick Malone - Serial Arrestee 

When Patrick Malone got involved with Rocky 
Flats, he was working with the Environmental Ac¬ 
tion Reprint Service (EARS), traveling the country 
and selling pro-solar t-shirts and other merchandise 
at various events and conferences. “I got sick of 
working square jobs. Ed been a building inspector, 

Ed done surveying in 
mines, and I wanted a 
different lifestyle that 
was pro-solar and 
anti-nuke.” 

Selling t-shirts at 
the initial rally orga¬ 
nized by the American 
Friends Service Com¬ 
mittee wasn’t enough 
for Patrick, but he had 
work to do in Denver 
and decided not to be 
part of civil disobedience on the tracks, at least until 
the second occupation was being planned. 

People from EARS asked him if he would use his 
van to support the action. “At the end of the day I de¬ 
cided to get out of the van and go sleep at the snow 
fort, and the next day I stayed for the arrest on the 
tracks. It was a crossroads in my life.” 

Patrick remained with the occupation to the last 
day, January 18,1979, when he was arrested and the 
tipi that had been used as a living space for Truth 
Forcers was taken down. In all, Patrick was arrested 
six times at Rocky Flats. 

Patrick continued the lifestyle of an activist, work¬ 
ing full time on anti-nuclear weapon and power is¬ 
sues for another five years, at which time his lawyer 
suggested he might take a break for awhile in order 
to lessen his legal liability. He heeded the advice. He 
currently lives in Atlanta and is kept busy by his five 
children. 

Patrick is working on two documentaries on the 
Rocky Flats reunions, and continues to participate 
in anti-nuclear efforts whenever possible. 


Will Toor - Activist Mayor 

Before his involvement with Rocky Flats, Will had 
already been drawn to anti-nuclear activism. Taking 
a break from graduate school at Stanford in 1980, 
Will traveled across the country to Seabrook, New 
Hampshire to protest its power plant. There he met 
Marian Doub and Jimmy Walker, activists with the 
Rocky Flats Truth Force. 

“On our way back to California, our car broke 
down in Boulder,” Will recalls. The broken-down car 
turned into a happy accident. Will elected to stay in 
Boulder for a while, occupying his time by getting 
involved with the Alliance for a Peaceful Alternative, 
Eco-cycle, and the Rocky Flats Coalition. 

“I had already been involved in anti-nuclear is¬ 
sues, but that time in Boulder was certainly part of 
my introduction to political organizing and activism, 
which has shaped my life since. I wouldn’t say I was 
one of the core organizers for the Rocky Flats Coali¬ 
tion, but I supported them however I could. When 
they did the encirclement protest, I was the one who 
drove around the porta-potty.” 

Will has come a 
long way since porta- 
potty patrol. Boast¬ 
ing a Ph.D. in physics 
from the University 
of Chicago, Will was 
elected mayor of Boul¬ 
der, serving from 1998 
to 2004, when he was 
elected Boulder Coun¬ 
ty Commissioner. 

Will left the com¬ 
missioner’s office in 
January 2013 due to term limits, and is currently 
working at the Southwest Energy Efficiency Project 
(SWEEP), a nonprofit public interest group that seeks 
to promote energy efficiency in a six-state region. At 
SWEEP, Will works to promote public and alternative 
transit, and switching from gas to electric vehicles. 
Will still lives in Boulder with his wife Mariella Col¬ 
vin, and their two children, Nicky and Tera. 




161 








A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


Gary, Jean, Lori and Kristi 
Zimmerman - Nuclear Family 

A professor teaching conflict resolution at Man¬ 
chester College in Indiana, Gary was on a sabbatical 
with his family, studying at the University of Colo¬ 
rado’s Conflict and Peace Studies program, when 

his wife Jean (bot¬ 
tom left) heard about 
the planned rally at 
Rocky Flats and the 
nonviolence training 
offered through the 
American Friends 
Service Committee. 
Jean and Gary at¬ 
tended the training 
and the subsequent 
April demonstration. 

“As members of 
the Church of the 
Brethren, Jean and I 
had been raised with 
peace as a focus. 
When we realized 
this was happening so 
close to us, we saw it 
as a chance for us to 
act on our faith.” 

Jean was more 
active in the begin¬ 
ning with support 
from Gary and their 
daughters Lori (top right) and Kristi (bottom right), 
ages 7 and 3 at the time. After a few days, it was 
impossible for Gary to remain on the sidelines and 
with his involvement it became a family project. 
The family went home to Manchester in August at 


the conclusion of Gary’s studies, and returned for 
a trial involving Jean in November. Kristi and Lori 
supported their mother by attending; Lori remem¬ 
bers “a special day when John Denver came into 
the court room to listen to the testimony and lend 
his support. It was very impressive to know that 
a celebrity felt like what my mom was doing was 

important.” 

Gary returned to 
teaching at Manches¬ 
ter, using his experi¬ 
ence at Rocky Flats, 
“...as an example of 
how to work at societal 
change with nonvio¬ 
lent strategies, leaving 
a better world for our 
children and grand¬ 
children. I think that 
other than raising our 
daughters, it’s the most 
important work Jean 
and I ever did together. 
It was enlivening.” 

Jean worked as a 
counselor at an el¬ 
ementary school until 
her death in 1996. She 
is survived by Gary, 
now Professor Emeri¬ 
tus of Psychology, 
and their two daugh¬ 
ters. Lori became a a 
family practice physician in North Manchester, and 
Kristi (who appears on page 58 of this book as a 
three-year-old on her mother’s lap at the trial) is now 
Senior Academic Advisor at Davenport University in 
Kalamazoo, Michigan. 




162 




A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


Pam Roberts - Filmmaker 

Having recently completed graduate school in 
filmmaking at the University of Southern California 
in Los Angeles, Pam moved to Colorado in June of 
1978 to meet up with Roy Young, already an orga¬ 
nizer with the Rocky Flats Truth Force. 

“It was total immersion into a world I’d never 
been to before. I didn’t want to jump in and pro¬ 
test, but I thought the next best thing was to do a 
documentary about it. I’d planned to work in fea¬ 
ture films and had never made a documentary, never 
even thought about it. But the subject was so im¬ 
portant that I just had to get involved.” Pam quickly 
rounded up equipment and crew and began filming 
the months of protests at the Rocky Flats plant, fol¬ 
lowed by the trial of those who had committed civil 
disobedience in order to close the plant. By the end, 
Pam had been arrested with everyone else. 

“Our phone was tapped. When I got on the phone 
I would jokingly say ‘Hello everybody, you’re lis¬ 
tening to a real important person here.’” Over the 
course of filming, Pam was confronted by a SWAT 

team, subpoenaed to 
appear before the De¬ 
partment of Energy, 
and denounced before 
Congress. 

Despite this, she 
still released her docu¬ 
mentary on the Truth 
Force, Decision at 
Rocky Flats: A Ques¬ 
tion of Trespass. 

After leaving Colo¬ 
rado Pam moved to 
Atlanta and has worked for the last 15 years as an 
executive producer and Emmy Award winning docu¬ 
mentary filmmaker at Georgia Public Broadcasting. 


Frank Cordaro - Faithful Activist 

In 1977 Frank Cordaro had just spent his first 
month in jail for civil disobedience in Washington 
DC. On returning to the Catholic Worker House 
in Des Moines, Iowa, Frank and his partner at the 
time, Jacquee Dickey, heard about a demonstration 
at Rocky Flats from the American Friends Service 
Committee, one of the sponsors. 

“We had a community back in Des Moines that 
was wealthy enough to afford Jacquee and I the 
time to drive on down to Rocky Flats, spend a week 

on the tracks, get ar¬ 
rested, go to jail and 
return to Des Moines 
a month later.” 

Frank initially went 
to support his partner 
in getting arrested, 
but his investment in 
the cause grew rap¬ 
idly. “It was so pow¬ 
erful, after spending a 
week camped out on 
the tracks I couldn’t 
keep myself from going and getting arrested with 
Jacquee and everyone else.” 

During his month at Rocky Flats, Frank made life¬ 
long connections. “I met great people, like Dan and 
Bob Ellsberg, and I made lifelong friends, especially 
with Catholic Workers.” 

After a month of fierce activism, Frank and Jac¬ 
quee returned to Des Moines, bringing a new per¬ 
spective with them. “We came to understand how 
important lifestyle choices are. They give activists the 
freedom to resist the system and go to jail while our 
community keeps on going. There’s nothing deadlier 
than a nuclear family, debt, and a nine to five job.” 

Aside from the 18 years he served the Diocese of 
Des Moines as a priest before resigning, Frank has 
lived and worked at the Des Moines Catholic Work¬ 
er. Heavily involved in activism through it all, he has 
served over five years of accumulated jail time for 
civil disobedience. 




163 




A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


Anna Koop - Catholic Worker 


Karen Janowitz - Trainer 




In 1978 Anna had just moved into the Denver 
Catholic Worker. “That was an interesting period. 
It was post-Vatican II, and the Loretto Community 
had divested from educational institutions; it freed 
people up to do what they wanted.” Anna wanted to 
get involved with Rocky Flats. 

Anna’s involvement began before the initial demon¬ 
stration that April, and continued long afterwards. She 
was part of an affinity group that met at the Catholic 

Worker and focused 
on Rocky Flats. “The 
group was wonderful 
for asking theological 
questions, moral ques¬ 
tions, and political 
questions about what 
we were doing.” 

They participated 
in the demonstration 
and later performed 
weekly vigils until 
the plant closed in 
1994, long after the Truth Force occupation had 
come to an end. 

Anna went on to work on the Nuclear Freeze 
campaign after Rocky Flats and has remained very 
involved in activism, ranging from Central American 
and immigration issues to the homeless. Anna was 
also involved in opposition to the war in Iraq on a 
number of fronts, including peace theater and with 
Veterans Against the War. 

Anna has attended a weekly anti-war vigil in 
front of Denver’s Capitol for the past 12 years, and 
still lives at the Denver Catholic Worker where she 
moved at the start of the “year of disobedience.” 





In May of 1978 Karen was on a bus going cross¬ 
country. Traveling through Colorado she was 
amazed by the sudden falling of spring snow - the 
same snowfall that so strongly affected activists at 
Rocky Flats, who would later become her friends. 
That September Karen moved to Boulder to begin 
her junior year at the University of Colorado. 

“Rocky Flats was in our backyard and I felt then 
that I couldn’t not get involved; finding people that 
had those same convictions cinched it for me. When 
I got involved, I really got involved and I learned 
so much so quickly about Rocky Flats’ place in the 
broader military complex, environmental and health 
effects from radiation, group dynamics and consen¬ 
sus-based decision making, and feminist politics. 
I led lots of nonviolence trainings for civil disobe¬ 
dience and peacekeeping during that time. We had 
such a great community of activists because we knew 
that what we were doing was so special and so im¬ 
portant, and our passions built off each other.” 

Passionate about 
the Truth Force to the 
end, Karen valued the 
lessons she learned 
on group organiza¬ 
tion and nonviolence 
and the interconnect¬ 
edness of everything 
- not to mention the 
bonds she formed 
with fellow members. 

After Rocky Flats, 
Karen lived in Europe 
for a couple of years doing nonviolence training and 
anti-militarist actions, and has continued to be in¬ 
volved in social justice and environmental causes. 

Karen has since worked in nonprofits and the 
public sector mostly in environmental issues, and 
currently works as an energy program manager fo¬ 
cusing on energy efficiency for the Washington State 
University Energy Program. She lives in Olympia, 
Washington and has a 20 year old daughter, Manya, 
who is in college. 



164 




A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


Jack Cohen-Joppa - Nuclear Resister 


Shelley Abend-Zimbalist - Facilitator 


A year of college in England left Jack with per¬ 
spective on how the rest of the world perceived the 
United States. When he returned for the fall semes¬ 
ter at the University of Colorado in Boulder, “Rocky 
Flats was already on my radar as an opportunity 
for involvement. I didn’t know others were already 
organizing to protest, but when I found out about 
it I got involved. I joined the nonviolence train¬ 
ing with my friends 
for the 1978 rally, 
and when people re¬ 
turned to the tracks, I 
went with ‘em.” 

Over a few short 
months Jack involved 
himself to the point 
that he dropped out 
of college a few weeks 
before finals. He be¬ 
came familiar with 
the civil rights move¬ 
ment and opposition to the Vietnam War in the 60s, 
and wanted to do something for the world instead of 
just being a student. 

“I turned 22 that summer and the stars sort of 
aligned and I said, ‘Yeah, this is it.’” The chance to 
advance civil disobedience as a tactic in social jus¬ 
tice appealed to him. As a cause he had concluded 
that he opposed nuclear power and weapons, but 
hadn’t done much beyond that. “It changed my life. I 
could’ve gone down a totally different path.” 

Soon after the Rocky Flats actions, Jack started a 
newsletter, The Nuclear Resister, which has been in 
circulation for over 30 years. Run by Jack and his 
wife Felice, the newsletter and accompanying blog 
(nukeresister.org) chronicle anti-nuclear and anti-war 
arrests, encouraging support for the jailed activists. 

In the late 1990s and early 2000s, Felice and Jack 
were also deeply involved coordinating the U.S. 
Campaign to Free Mordechai Vanunu, the Israeli 
nuclear whistleblower. 

Felice &c Jack Cohen-Joppa live in Tucson, Ari¬ 
zona and have two grown kids. 



Having just graduated with a degree in history 
from Hobart and Williams-Smith College, Shelley 
was ready for adventure when she went to protest 
the nuclear power plant in Seabrook, New Hamp¬ 
shire. There she met a group called the Solar Rollers, 
people who hiked around the country protesting nu¬ 
clear weaponry and power. Shelley decided to come 
along with them on their next tour. 

“I quit my job, parked my dog with my parents, 
and left, unsure of where it would take me. It was 
very open-ended. At that time in my life, it was the 
most compelling thing going on.” 

When Shelley found her way to Rocky Flats, she 
decided to stick around. She joined the occupation at 
Rocky Flats, and lived in a group house in Boulder. 
Building on the crash course on nuclear issues she’d 
received traveling cross-country with the Solar Roll¬ 
ers, Shelley became a nonviolence trainer at the occu¬ 
pation and helped to organize a few demonstrations. 

“My thinking has certainly evolved since then,” 
she concedes. “But all of that group process helped 

me see myself as a fa¬ 
cilitator of people and 
ideas.” 

Shelley went on to 
become a trained me¬ 
diator and has since 
found work sup¬ 
porting social justice 
movements ranging 
from low-income 
neighborhoods in 
Massachusetts to 
community building 
efforts in Eastern Europe after the Berlin Wall came 
down. She currently works as the director of the 
Solidago Foundation and the See Forward Fund, an 
organization that supports the evolution of the so¬ 
cial justice movement nationally and internationally. 

Shelley lives in Northampton, MA with her hus¬ 
band, Andy, a radical economist at Smith College. 
She has two stepsons and two children of her own. 



165 



A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


LeRoy Moore - Professor & Historian 

When the occupation of the tracks at Rocky Flats 
began, LeRoy was teaching as a professor of reli¬ 
gious studies at the University of Denver, doing his 
best to alert his students that we humans face three 
major threats to our ongoing existence: nuclear ho¬ 
locaust, environmental disaster, and authoritarian 
governance. LeRoy was totally unaware that nearby 
a nuclear bomb plant represented all three dangers 
in very concentrated form. 

He heard about Rocky Flats from the Truth Force 
occupation of the tracks and almost immediately 
“walked out of the academic world and into the ac¬ 
tivist one.” 

Committed to Gandhian nonviolence, LeRoy be¬ 
came a pivotal figure in the ongoing cause. “When I 
learned about Rocky Flats I simplified my way of life 
and began volunteering with the American Friends 
Service Committee. Now, 35 years later, I’m still pay¬ 
ing close attention to Rocky Flats.” 

In 1983 he helped create the Rocky Mountain 
Peace and Justice Center, an organization that has 
provided the base for his work ever since. 

LeRoy worked with 
others to end produc¬ 
tion at Rocky Flats, 
then sought the best 
possible cleanup of the 
highly contaminated 
site. He aggresively 
opposed those who 
eventually prevailed in 
a cheaper, less respon¬ 
sible cleanup. 

The principal au¬ 
thor of the Citizens’ 
Guide to Rocky Flats (1992) and of numerous ar¬ 
ticles and papers on all aspects of the Rocky Flats 
issue, LeRoy also taught courses on nonviolent 
social change at the University of Colorado from 
1980 until his retirement in 1996. A father and 
grandfather, he resides in Boulder with his long¬ 
time partner, Barbara. 


Daniel Ellsberg - Most Dangerous Man 

Daniel Ellsberg’s involvement with nuclear weap¬ 
ons began in 1958 when he worked on a govern¬ 
ment contract at the Rand Corporation. Studying 
the country’s strategic plan for nuclear war, and the 
accompanying command and control system, Dan 
was struck by the number of nuclear weapons the 
United States had at its disposal, and the ease with 
which they could be fired with an “irreversible go.” 

Dan was asked to 
speak at the Rocky 
Flats rally in April, 
1978 on the dangers 
of nuclear weapons. 
It was the beginning 
of his staunch activ¬ 
ism with the Truth 
Force. One of the 
original 28 protesters 
who refused to leave 
the tracks the night 
of the protest, Dan’s 
fierce mix of idealism and activism became a ban¬ 
ner around which the group formed. Many members 
were galvanized by his passion in opposing nuclear 
weapons. Dan was able to put the nuclear threat in 
perspective for the group, giving insight on how the 
rest of the world might react to the demonstrations 
carried out by the small group of people sitting on 
train tracks in a field in Colorado. 

Now in his early eighties, Dan remains a staunch 
activist supporting patriotic whistleblowing efforts 
in addition to his opposition of nuclear weaponry. 
“There has never been a greater need for such civil 
courage in our citizenry and officials.” 

In 2006 he was awarded the Right Livelihood 
Award “for putting peace and truth first, at con¬ 
siderable personal risk.” In 2010 the documentary 
film The Most Dangerous Man in America: Daniel 
Ellsberg and the Pentagon Papers was nominated for 
an Academy Award. A Senior Fellow of the Nuclear 
Age Peace Foundation, Dan currently lives in Kens¬ 
ington, CA with his wife Patricia. They have three 
grown children, Robert, Mary, and Michael. 




166 




A CRITICALITY 01 CONSCIINCE 


Allen Ginsberg - Poet 

1 he official web site, www.allengmsberg.org, 
defines him .is .1 “renowned poet, world traveler, 
spiritu.il seeker, founding member of .1 major liter 
.iry movement, champion of human and civil rights, 
photographer and songwriter, political gadfly, teach¬ 
er and co-founder of a poetics school.” For most 
who knew Allen - he defied simple classification. 

His participation and multiple arrests at Rocky 
Flats .are but a tiny mention on the lifeline portrayed 
on his site, and further investigation reveals a serial 
activist who. long before Rocky Flats, had already 
used his considerable celebrity.', his outrageous the¬ 
ater. and his conviction to protect human rights, pro¬ 
mote non-violence and rally against war many times. 

Examples include Allen chanting OM with his Har¬ 
monium to calm down disruptive Hell’s Angels at a 
1965 peace protest; Allen planning and performing 
with the Grateful Dead and Jefferson Airplane) at 
the 196~ “H uman Be-In” a speaking-musical-poetry- 
performance gathering of younger people aware of the 
planet's fate; his first arrest for anti-war activities in 
196~ with pediatrician Dr. Benjamin Spock and 264 

others at an anti-draft 
demonstration in New 
York City; police at¬ 
tacking the crowd at 
the 1968 Democratic 
National Convention 
whil e Allen conducts a 
seven-hour OM chant; 
Allen organizing a 
1972 peace protest, 
which was infiltrated 
by FBI agents posing 
as demonstrators and 
deliberately mating a disruption to instigate arrests, 
including those of Allen and other participants. 

Allen would stay active in social issues up until 
his dearr. ;r. 1997 at the age 70. His seminal poem 
PluUjrnan Ocfiy page 44; was written and first per¬ 
formed a- Rocky Flats during the height of the year 
of disobedience, and would become an anthem for 
the ar.ti-n ,s.ear weapons movement. 


Keith Pope - Defense Attorney 

A newly minted graduate from the University of 
Colorado School of Journalism, Keith had just begun 
working as a reporter for United Press International in 
Wyoming when the demonstrations began at Rocky 
Flats. He would drive down to Boulder on the week¬ 
ends to cover the civil disobedience on his own time. 
While still in school at CU he had worked with pho¬ 
tographer Joseph Daniel at the Colorado Daily and 
the two budding journalists conspired to combine 
their efforts covering the Truth Force into what would 
become the first edition of A Year of Disobedience. 

Keith would work for UPI until 1986 when, on 
a lark, he took the LSAT and aced it. Law school 

was next, followed 
by a successful career 
as a criminal defense 
attorney. It was prac¬ 
ticing law, not jour¬ 
nalism, which kindled 
the spark of social 
conscious that now 
marks his persona. 

“As a reporter I was 
always trying to stay 
skeptical about gov¬ 
ernment,” explained 
Keith. “But being a lawyer really made me so. I actu¬ 
ally feel more of a connection now to activists than 1 
did back then because I have become more aware. I 
think anyone who goes to law school and learns the 
moral tenets of the justice system, then practices as 
a criminal defense lawyer, eventually becomes disil¬ 
lusioned by the courts and their disregard for indi¬ 
vidual human rights. The nexus is that activists - like 
those at Rocky Flats - are arrested for exercising 
their First Amendment rights. And this has actually 
gotten worse in America, not better.” 

Keith still works a yeoman’s schedule, defending 
“run-of-the-mill drug offences, violence, theft, occa¬ 
sional murder, and sometimes even capital cases" hut 
he finds time for pro bo no work with groups like 
Occupy Denver and Columbus Day Protest. 




1 6/ 


A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


THE AUTHOR 

A fter producing the original edition of A 
Year of Disobedience in 1979 Joseph 
Daniel built a successful freelance photog¬ 
raphy career traveling the world on assign¬ 
ment for such publications as The New York 
Times, GEO, and National Geographic World. 

He produced a wide variety of books for sev¬ 
eral major publishers, including Doubleday and 
Harper & Row, and custom magazines for The 
Red Zinger Bicycle Classic, Healthy Choice, 
Saturn Cars, and the Jane Goodall Institute. 

In 1988 he founded, edited and published 
the award-winning eco-magazine Buzzworm: 
The Environmental Journal for six years. He 
launched another popular consumer publica¬ 
tion in 2002 featuring exotic fly fishing travel 
entitled Wild On The Fly, which was adapted 



in 2011 into an annual 13-part high definition 
television series filmed and produced by Daniel 
for Outdoor Channel. 

In 2013 Daniel formed Story Arts Media, 
a transmedia creative company dedicated to 
“Enlighted Book Publishing and Filmmaking” 
based in Boulder. This new edition of A Year of 
Disobedience is published under that imprint. 


168 







A CRITICALITY OF CONSCIENCE 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


T o call A Year of Disobedience “my” book is 
a gross misappropriation of credit. At best 
it is “our” book, but most accurately it is “their“ 
book - the brave members of the Rocky Flats 
Truth Force. I merely stood by and recorded 
the events, at no risk to myself, and then asked 
for their further assistance and contribution, 
which was given freely and without condition. 

This was a remarkable experience in 1979, 
and it was even more so when we revisited it 
in 2013. I need to specifically thank original 
Truth Force members LeRoy Moore, Elena 
Klaver, Chet Tchozewski and Evan Freirich for 
their assistance and unbridled encouragement 
- and for their warm sign offs on email corre¬ 
spondence which ran the gamut from “Peace,” 
to “Love,” to my favorite, “Still on the Tracks.” 

And much gratitude to Daniel Ellsberg for his 
83-years-young enthusiasm, keen intellect and 


undaunted courage. The events of today prove 
just how right he was over 40 years ago. 

Evan’s son August was a terrific help in com¬ 
piling our Activists Appendix and in developing 
our social media platforms. Gina Youngblood 
rose to her usual level of perfection transcribing 
the original book manuscript, and many fine 
folks lent a sharp eye to the final edit. 

Deep appreciation to philanthropist Cynda 
Collins Arsenault for her wicked editing, and for 
providing uncomplicated funding to produce this 
new print version. And a nod to Virginia Brock 
and Rick Koopman, who did the same 35 years 
ago when we produced the original edition. 

The Rocky Flats Nuclear Weapons Plant is 
now closed due to the efforts of thousands of 
protestors, and over 500 activists who were ar¬ 
rested during that “year of disobedience.” This 
book is a testament to all of them. 


169 



A YEAR OF DISOBEDIENCE 


IF YOU WERE INSPIRED 
READING THIS BOOK 


T hank you for reading this new and revised 
edition of A Year of Disobedience. Please 
spread the word about this book, give it as a gift, 
and let folks know that it is available in print at 
better bookstores and through Amazon, and in 
enhanced ebook formats with embedded video, 
music and poetry. To find out more about every 
way you can experience this story, please visit 
www.ayearofdisobedience.com 
Beyond my personal revelation that nuclear 
arms proliferation has escalated out of control, 
and that human existence is in perhaps its most 
precarious moment in time, there were two 
pieces of “media” I revisited that convinced me 
the message originally sent from the tracks at 
Rocky Flats in 1978 needed to told again. 

First was the film Dark Circle , produced in 
1983 by Judy Irving, Chris Beaver, and Ruth 
Landy. Winner of the Grand Prize at the Sun¬ 
dance Film Festival and recipient of an Emmy 
Award, Dark Circle follows the trail of pluto¬ 
nium from the Rocky Flats Nuclear Weapons 
Plant in Colorado, to the Diablo Canyon Nu¬ 
clear Power Plant in California, to Hiroshima 
and Nagasaki in Japan. It is visual and visceral, 
and available online through iTunes, Amazon 
and www.videoproject.com. 


The second was the 1993 PBS Frontline pro¬ 
duction Secrets of a Bomb factory, co-pro¬ 
duced with Oregon Public Broadcasting. This 
one-hour documentary features Wes McKinley 
and other members of the “runaway” grand 
jury investigating potential crimes at the 
Rocky Flats Nuclear Weapons Plant in Colo¬ 
rado. What they learned in their two-and-a- 
half years of listening to testimony and exam¬ 
ining evidence disturbed them enough to risk 
prosecution themselves by going public. It is 
available at www.tvmuse.eu 

But as Leroy Moore discussed earlier; for me, 
the most inspiring “documentary” about Rocky 
Flats is Kristen Iversen book, Full Body Burden. 
I read this memoir and cried, and cussed, and 
wondered in awe at Iversen’s bravery in disclos¬ 
ing the secrets of her unraveling family, and the 
revelations of growing up just downwind of 
Rocky Flats. An absolute “must read” available 
at better bookstores everywhere or through 
iTunes and Amazon. 

And finally, if all of this has awakened the 
activist spirit in you... stop, take a breath, 
think of a world without this threat, then visit 
the Rocky Mountain Peace and Justice Center 
at rmpjc.org for ideas on how to get involved. 


170 










A Year of Disobedience and a Criticality of Conscience is an updated edition of 
the original photo-documentary on the demonstrations, civil disobedience, arrests, and trials of thousands of people 
against the Rocky Flats Nuclear Weapons Plant during the one-year period from April 29, 1978 to April 28, 1979. 

Originally situated near Denver, Colorado the plant was a genuine threat to the life and health of millions of people 
and was eventually shut down after an FBI raid and a sealed Grand Jury investigation. Rocky Flats remains cloaked 
in controversy after a compromised Super Fund cleanup and conversion into a National Wildlife Refuge. 

Includes all of the original photographs by Joseph Daniel, the original text and trial transcriptions by Daniel Ellsberg 
and Keith Pope, and the original poetry by Allen Ginsberg. New material includes a historical update and reflection 
by LeRoy Moore, and a powerful new Afterword by Daniel Ellsberg and Joseph Daniel that explores the current 
worldwide nuclear weapons threat, the role of patriotic whistleblowers, and the conflict between national security 
and government surveillance. 



www.ayearofdisobedience.com 


$19.95 

ISBN 978-0-9889754-4-6 
5 1 9 9 5 > 


9 78 


988 975446 


























































