Hayek's The Constitution of Liberty 


Hayek's The Constitution 
of Liberty 

An Account of Its Argument 

EUGENE F. MILLER 


iea 

The Institute of Economic Affairs 


First published in Great Britain in 2010 by 
The Institute of Economic Affairs 
2 Lord North Street 
Westminster 
London swip 3LB 

in association with Profile Books Ltd 

The mission of the Institute of Economic Affairs is to improve public 
understanding of the fundamental institutions of a free society, by analysing 
and expounding the role of markets in solving economic and social problems. 

Copyright © The Institute of Economic Affairs 2010 

The moral right of the author has been asserted. 

All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, 
no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored or introduced into a 
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means (electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise), without the prior written 
permission of both the copyright owner and the publisher of this book. 

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. 

isbn 978 o 255 36637 3 

Many IEA publications are translated into languages other than English or 
are reprinted. Permission to translate or to reprint should be sought from the 
Director General at the address above. 

Typeset in Stone by MacGuru Ltd 
info@macguru. org. uk 


Printed and bound in Great Britain by Hobbs the Printers 


CONTENTS 


The author 1 1 

Foreword by Steven D. Ealy 1 2 

Summary 1 7 

Editorial note 22 

Author’s preface 23 

1 Hayek's Introduction 29 

Civilisation 31 

Political philosophy 32 

The ideal 34 

PART I: THE VALUE OF FREEDOM 37 

2 Individual freedom, coercion and progress 

(Chapters 1-5 and 9) 39 

Individual freedom and responsibility 39 

The individual and society 42 

Limiting state coercion 44 

Freedom of action 46 

Freedom and progress 48 

Progress as radical change 5 1 


3 The use and limits of knowledge 

(Chapters 2, 3, 4) 54 

Using inherited knowledge: rules and traditions 55 

Using contemporaneous knowledge: imitation, prices 

and esteem 57 

Knowledge and social order 59 

Reason, mind and civilisation 63 

Values 67 

Moral rules 71 

4 Equality, freedom and just distribution 

(Chapters 4, 6 and 8) 76 

Are individuals equal? 77 

Inequality, law and freedom 80 

Benefits of inequality 82 

Merit and value 85 

5 Majority rule and limited government 

(Chapters 7 and 10) 89 

Majority rule and the community 89 

Limited and arbitrary government 92 

Democracy versus elite rule 93 

Democracy is a procedure only 95 

PART II: FREEDOM AND THE LAW 99 

6 The Rule of Law and its detractors 

(Chapters 14 and 16) 101 

Importance of the ideal 1 02 


A meta-legal principle 
Detractors of the Rule of Law 


103 

107 


7 Origins and development of the Rule of Law 

(Chapters 11, 12, 13) 110 

English origins 1 1 0 

America’s contribution 1 1 3 

Culmination in Germany 1 1 7 

8 Requirements of the Rule of Law 

(Chapter 14) 122 

True law promotes freedom by safeguarding the private 
sphere 1 22 

True law is known and certain 1 23 

True law is both general and equal 1 24 

The Rule of Law requires an independent judiciary 1 25 

The executive, in coercing private citizens, is subject to 
legislative rules and to judicial review 1 2 7 

The Rule of Law safeguards fundamental rights and civil 
liberties 1 28 

Emergency powers, just compensation and the public 

interest 1 30 

9 Economic policy and the Rule of Law 

(Chapter 15) 134 

What is policy? 1 34 

Tests of policy 135 

Excluded policies 1 3 7 

Policies measured by expediency 1 38 

The community’s interest 1 39 


PART III: FREEDOM IN THE WELFARE STATE 


143 


10 Socialism in a new guise: social justice and 


the welfare state (Chapter 17) 145 

Advent of the welfare state 1 45 

Hayek and the welfare state 1 46 

11 Social security, taxation and the redistribution 

of wealth (Chapters 19 and 20) 149 

Social security 1 49 

Proportional versus progressive taxation 1 54 

12 Stopping coercion in employment 

(Chapter 18) 159 

Coercive unionism 1 59 

Economic and political dangers 1 62 

13 Preventing inflation (Chapter 21) 165 

Inflation and the welfare state 1 65 

Misguided monetary policy 1 66 

The denationalisation of money 1 68 

14 Safeguarding progress (Chapters 22, 23, 24) 170 

Urban policy 1 71 

Agricultural policy 173 

Natural resource policy 1 75 

Education and research policy 1 76 


15 Why I am not a conservative (Postscript) 


181 


Bibliography 


186 


About the IEA 


190 


THE AUTHOR 


Dr Eugene F. Miller (1935-2010) was a professor of political 
science at the University of Georgia from 1967 until his retire- 
ment in 2003. He was a student in the University of Chicago’s 
Committee on Social Thought (PhD, 1965), where he wrote a 
dissertation on David Hume. F. A. Hayek chaired Miller’s disser- 
tation committee, whose other members were Feo Strauss and 
Joseph Cropsey. Miller edited David Hume’s Essays Moral, Polit- 
ical and Literary (Fiberty Fund, 1985), and published articles on 
Hume, Strauss and Hayek. He also published on the American 
Founding, the nature of liberal education, the relationship 
between technology and politics, and the intellectual foundations 
of philanthropy. 


11 


FOREWORD 


F. A. Hayek was awarded the Nobel Prize in Economics in 
1974. The press release announcing this award recognised that 
‘Hayek’s contributions in the field of economic theory are both 
profound and original’, but concluded with an apparent slap 
at his best-known work: ‘For him it is not a matter of a simple 
defence of a liberal system of society as may sometimes appear 
from the popularised versions of his thinking.’ 

What the Nobel Prize announcement did not make clear was 
that these ‘popularised versions of his thinking’ were written, not 
by some journalistic hack as one might assume, but by Hayek 
himself, and that these too were profound and original. The Road 
to Serfdom (1944) and The Constitution of Liberty (i960) each had 
an impact far beyond that of the standard academic treatise on 
economics. Historian Alan Brinkley, in The End of Reform: New 
Deal Liberalism in Recession and War, argues that Hayek ‘forced 
into public discourse the question of the compatibility of democ- 
racy and statism’. 

The influence of Hayek on Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher 
is legendary. In both The Path to Power and The Downing Street 
Years Lady Thatcher acknowledged the influence of Hayek on her 
view of the world. There is also evidence of his influence on her 
policy decisions. Once during a party policy meeting a speaker 
started to argue that the Conservative Party should adopt a 


12 


FOREWORD 


pragmatic middle way. According to John Ranelagh in Thatcher’s 
People, ‘Before he had finished speaking ... the new Party Leader 
reached into her briefcase and took out a book. It was Friedrich 
von Hayek’s The Constitution of Liberty. Interrupting, she held the 
book up for all of us to see. “This,” she said sternly, “is what we 
believe,” and banged Hayek down on the table.’ 

But The Constitution of Liberty is not a narrowly conceived 
party tract. It favours no party, except perhaps for ‘the party of 
life, the party that favors free growth and spontaneous evolution’, 
which Hayek evokes in his postscript. Rather, The Constitution 
of Liberty is the culmination of four decades of reflection on the 
nature of economic, political and social life and the possibility of 
a free society. As Professor Miller cogently argues and illustrates, 
its three parts comprise ‘a careful argument that runs through 
the book from beginning to end’. Part I, ‘The Value of Freedom’, 
provides the philosophical foundation and justification of a free 
society and defence against the major contemporary opponents of 
such a society. In Part II, ‘Freedom and the Law’, Hayek provides 
an account of the development of the Rule of Law as the central 
institution of a free society. In Part III, ‘Freedom in the Welfare 
State’, Hayek examines many areas of contemporary policy 
concern - social security, taxation, healthcare, housing, urban 
planning, natural resources and education - in light of the prin- 
ciples developed in the earlier parts of his study. 

In a footnote in his introduction, Hayek tells the reader that 
‘David Hume ... will be our constant companion and sage guide 
throughout’ The Constitution of Liberty. Hayek holds up Hume, 
along with Adam Smith, Adam Ferguson and Edmund Burke, 
as exemplars of the ‘British tradition’ of liberty. More than the 
others whom Hayek mentions, Hume emphasised the importance 


13 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


of opinion as the foundation of government. In his essay ‘Of the 
First Principles of Government’, Hume wrote, ‘It is therefore, on 
opinion only that government is founded; and this maxim extends 
to the most despotic and most military governments, as well as to 
the most free and most popular.’ The importance of opinion, and 
the wisdom of opinion collected over time in the form of cultural 
traditions, is crucial to Hayek’s argument for spontaneous order 
and the free society. 

Professor Miller does not offer his account of The Constitution 
of Liberty as a substitute for reading Hayek; rather, it is designed 
to be a guide to the central argument of Hayek’s work and there- 
fore belongs on the bookshelf alongside Hayek. It is written at 
a level accessible to the novice and simultaneously substantial 
enough to be of value to the specialist. Miller both provides an 
overview of the argument of The Constitution of Liberty and situates 
that argument within the broader context of Hayek’s intellec- 
tual career, so that he touches both on antecedents and later 
developments. 

Miller made two crucial decisions about the focus of this study 
that are worthy of note. First, he ignores the vast secondary litera- 
ture on Hayek in order to concentrate on Hayek himself. Second, 
Miller decided to provide as accurate and fair a reading of Hayek’s 
text as he could and therefore largely sets aside his own evalu- 
ation of Hayek. At a number of points in his study Miller points to 
tensions within Hayek’s argument and notes potential problems 
that Hayek may or may not have seen, but he does not diverge 
from his primary objective of providing as clear a statement of 
Hayek’s views as he can. 

Here is but one example of Miller’s decision to explicate 
Hayek clearly and to avoid excessive criticism. Miller notes that he 


H 


FOREWORD 


studied both with Hayek and Leo Strauss, the latter of whom was 
well known for arguing that there are crucial differences between 
ancient and modern thought. Hayek denies the importance of this 
division and traces the origins of liberalism to ancient Greece. 
Miller raises the questions of whether Hayek’s approach does 
violence to the historical record or hides potential tensions within 
the heart of liberal thought; but rather than answering these ques- 
tions himself Miller leaves their resolution to his readers. 

Eugene Miller passed away shortly after revising this text. 
With the publication of this study Miller has left his readers with 
two gifts. The first is intellectual: this volume offers a finely crafted 
restatement of the argument of F. A. Hayek’s most comprehensive 
work. 

Miller’s second gift is more elusive but in the long run perhaps 
of greater importance. To use appropriately an overworked and 
often misapplied characterisation, Miller here provides a model of 
what it means to be a gentleman and a scholar. In a world in which 
academic reputations are made by being constantly on the attack, 
Miller offers an example of modesty, generosity and moderation: 
a serious scholar taking another’s argument seriously. Miller’s 
study of The Constitution of Liberty sets before the reader the same 
challenge that Hayek does - the challenge of engaging the text, 
weighing the evidence for oneself, and participating at the highest 
level in true self-government. 

I strongly commend this careful and thought-provoking study 
to students, teachers, academics and others who are interested in 
understanding The Constitution of Liberty. 

STEVEN D. EALY 
Senior Fellow, Liberty Fund, Inc. 

July 2010 


15 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


The views expressed in this monograph are, as in all IEA publica- 
tions, those of the authors and not those of the Institute (which 
has no corporate view), its managing trustees, Academic Advisory 
Council members or senior staff. 


16 


SUMMARY 


The core argument that runs throughout The Constitution of 
Liberty concerns freedom and its value to the individual, to 
society and to civilisation at large. Without freedom of action 
in particular, progress in these areas would be impossible. 
Modern civilisation is in crisis because the West has lost faith 
in the principles of liberty or freedom (interchangeable terms 
for Hayek). Opinion ultimately governs our actions, and 
Hayek will seek to reshape it through a political philosophy 
that restates basic principles, vindicates fundamental values, 
articulates a guiding ‘ideal’ (the Rule of Law), and clarifies 
standards that ought to determine policy. 

Freedom requires that the coercion of some by others in 
society be reduced as much as possible. One function of 
government is to prevent individuals from coercing other 
individuals, but then government itself must be prevented 
from using coercion improperly. In a free society, the 
exercise of government’s coercive power is constrained and 
made predictable by general rules that apply equally to all 
individuals, including to those who make and enforce the laws. 
A free society is one that empowers individuals to develop and 
follow their own life plans. Attempts to manipulate the 
environment of individuals, e.g. by withholding vital 
information, are insidious forms of coercion. 


17 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


• Freedom and responsibility cannot be separated. 
Responsibility means that each individual must bear the 
consequences of his actions. Hayek’s ‘individuals’ are 
thoroughly enmeshed in social relations. 

• Forgetting that man’s knowledge is severely limited, modern 
rationalism is constantly tempted to plan and fashion the 
future comprehensively. Modern rationalism dates back 

to seventeenth-century philosophy, but later is exhibited 
most powerfully by socialism in its various forms. It gives 
rise to a destructive quest for perfection, in which inherited 
rules, traditions and moral values - invaluable gifts from the 
past - are thoughtlessly discarded. Ignorance is inevitable, 
unavoidable and the reality of all men, including those who 
occupy positions of power. Hayek is a strong critic of modern 
bureaucracy. 

• Social order develops through spontaneous growth as 
well as through some measure of deliberate construction. 
Spontaneous growth occurs when individuals and groups 
with limited knowledge interact with other individuals 
and groups, giving rise to unplanned patterns of behaviour 
and institutional forms. Hayek applauds the Scottish and 
other British philosophers of the late eighteenth and early 
nineteenth centuries for recognising the importance of 
spontaneous growth; and he builds on their ideas to develop 
the theory of social evolution that underpins his philosophy 
of freedom. By turning to the Scots, Hayek emphatically 
rejects the earlier liberal theories of John Locke and his 
followers, which started from natural rights and from an 
original contract. 

• Hayek rejects the idea of a ‘natural’ or ‘factual’ equality 


18 


SUMMARY 


between men. At the same time, he insists that individuals 
have a ‘dignity’ that we must respect. Hayek promises ‘an 
ultimate justification’ for freedom, which must be connected 
somehow to this idea of individual dignity: but he leaves the 
matter quite unclear. He does insist strongly that the Rule of 
Law permits social inequalities, whose beneficial results are 
generally overlooked by the misguided advocates of ‘social 
justice’. 

• Hayek regards democracy as the best practicable form of 
government, so long as a majority of the community is 
committed to individual liberty, the Rule of Law and limited 
government. Democracy is not a primarily a way of life, but a 
set of procedures for organising and operating government. 
There are no inherent substantive ends or core beliefs that are 
essential to democratic rule. By conceding that the majority 
of a community may embrace any set of core beliefs that it 
chooses, Hayek is left with no basis for opposing totalitarian 
democracies on democratic grounds. 

• Hayek applies his understanding of the evolutionary 
development of society in general to the growth of legal 
institutions and the Rule of Law. He traces this growth to 
England, America and Germany, but largely excludes French 
legal thought, which has favoured a rationalistic approach to 
the law which runs counter to a free society. 

• The ‘ideal’ of the Rule of Law requires that existing laws 
share certain characteristics. Law must be general; it must be 
known and certain and apply equally to all; it must provide 
for an independent judiciary; it must limit the executive 

by legislative and judicial rules; and it must safeguard 
fundamental rights and civil liberties. 


19 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


• Hayek does not favour passive government, but rather one 
that seeks many benefits for the community. Although he 
shares the ‘strong presumption against governments actively 
participating in economic efforts’, he nonetheless states that 
the ‘old formulae of laissez faire or non-intervention do not 
provide us with an adequate criterion for distinguishing 
between what is and what is not admissible in a free system’. 
As he explains, ‘it is the character rather than the volume 

of government activity that is important’. In economic 
matters, for example, an active government that assists the 
spontaneous forces of the market is preferable to a less active 
one that does the wrong things. In this regard he sees himself 
as following the best of the classical liberals, such as Adam 
Smith. 

• In cases where coercion might be involved, the policy actions 
of government are limited by the Rule of Law. In other cases, 
Hayek recommends that government’s policies be judged 
by the principle of expediency, or what best serves the 
community’s interest. 

• In the final part of The Constitution of Liberty Hayek examines 
many areas of contemporary policy concern - social security, 
taxation, healthcare, housing, urban planning, natural 
resources and education - in light of the principles developed 
in the earlier parts of his study. Two features stand out: Hayek 
is willing for government to provide a broad range of social 
services, in line with principles enunciated above; and he 
steadfastly opposes policies that aim at wealth redistribution 
or ‘social justice’. 

• In approaching The Constitution of Liberty, the reader 
must above all be prepared for surprises, regardless of his 


20 


SUMMARY 


previous readings of the text. There are plenty of loose ends 
and undeveloped lines of reasoning in The Constitution of 
Liberty. A crucial concept that Hayek depends on but leaves 
undeveloped is that of ‘the community’. Very much along 
Lockean lines, Hayek holds that the majority of a community, 
for its own protection, can authorise government to suspend 
civil liberties in emergency situations. But that is not all. The 
majority can authorise government to coerce citizens even 
when they have not violated the law. Leading examples are 
the military draft and the imposition of taxes. The implication 
here is that the community’s interest is the highest end that 
government must seek, overriding the strict Rule of Law or in 
furtherance of it. Expedient policies are measured finally by 
the interest of the community. Another challenge in reading 
Hayek’s text is to penetrate his theory of knowledge - one that 
views man’s mind as ‘a product of the civilization in which it 
has grown up’. Can Hayek avoid a thoroughgoing relativism 
and make room for universal or transcendent standards? 


21 


EDITORIAL NOTE 


Some brief editorial points should be noted regarding this 
monograph. First, UK spelling conventions have been used in 
the general text. The quotations from The Constitution of Liberty, 
however, are taken from the original US version. As such, 
American-English conventions are used in these quotations. 
Second, where The Constitution of Liberty is referred to, the relevant 
page numbers are put in brackets after the reference. Where other 
works of F. A. Hayek are referred to, the author simply refers to 
the date of the work, followed by page numbers if appropriate. 
The relevant works by F. A. Flayek are then listed at the back of 
the monograph. 


22 


AUTHOR'S PREFACE 


I take great pleasure in joining with the IEA to celebrate the 
fiftieth anniversary of the publication of F. A. Hayek ’s The Consti- 
tution of Liberty. Hayek had published important books and essay 
collections prior to this work and others would follow it; but The 
Constitution of Liberty continues to stand as the leading effort by 
any author, over the past century, to restate the principles of clas- 
sical liberalism. Typically people read selected chapters from this 
grand work, especially its controversial Postscript; and the usual 
scholarly practice is to draw from it selectively to see how Hayek 
treats a particular problem over several of his writings or to trace 
the development of his thought. In fact, The Constitution of Liberty 
advances a careful argument that runs through the book from 
beginning to end: selective reading is likely to miss it. 

Hayek’s core argument is essentially about freedom and its 
value to the individual, to society and to civilisation at large. His 
approach requires him to define a condition of freedom and, 
in particular, to say what freedom is not. In order to show that 
freedom is something valuable, Hayek must consider both its 
intrinsic worth and its consequences, whether foreseen or unfore- 
seen. Also, he must explain how a free society is different from 
an unfree one and, more broadly, how freedom contributes to 
human progress. In line with his desire to treat the question of 
freedom comprehensively, Hayek investigates the philosophical 


23 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


foundations of freedom and seeks to show how freedom can be 
established and preserved through the Rule of Law. Finally, he 
assesses a wide range of governmental policies in terms of their 
compatibility with freedom and their expediency. 

Hayek’s argument unfolds gradually; and the reader is some- 
times caught by surprise when important new lines of thought 
are introduced without much notice. Also, there are unresolved 
tensions and loose ends in Hayek’s argument that present inter- 
pretive difficulties. Hayek sometimes explores ideas that are 
not yet fully formed in his own mind, but which he will seek to 
clarify in later writings. For example, he will later present much 
more clearly the distinction among kinds of social order; the 
nature of rules; the meaning of justice; the character of evolu- 
tion; and the shape of democratic governance. Undoubtedly there 
are important differences between The Constitution of Liberty and 
Hayek’s later writings, but one should not assume that these are 
differences of principle. The later writings may simply clarify, 
expand or refine the argument of The Constitution of Liberty 
without abandoning its core principles. To decide this issue, one 
must obviously begin from The Constitution of Liberty itself and 
understand its basic argument. 

Insofar as I know, no writer has yet followed carefully the 
central argument of The Constitution of Liberty and shown how it is 
developed in the various chapters of the book. My aim is to give a 
fresh account of this argument - one that will be fully accessible to 
the general reader and also useful to the Hayek scholar. 

My original intention was to proceed chapter by chapter, but 
this proved to be impracticable. Some consolidation was required 
not only to hold my manuscript to a manageable length, but also 
to bring out the structure of Hayek’s argument. In his opening 


24 


author’s preface 


chapters, Hayek interweaves observations about freedom with 
observations about knowledge. I treat freedom and knowledge 
thematically, in different sections, but with a view to their connec- 
tion. Hayek takes up the problem of inequality at several points in 
his book, but I consolidate much of this in discussing Chapter 6. 
I consolidate several chapters in Part II on the origin and growth 
of the Rule of Law; and in covering what Hayek says in Part III on 
issues of policy, I look for common themes. To see how the order 
of my exposition compares with Hayek’s, the reader will find it 
helpful to refer to Hayek’s own table of contents, which can be 
found at the end of the book. 1 

The interpretive literature on Hayek is voluminous, and much 
of it is quite valuable; but if I should attempt to address it, a quite 
different book from the one intended would surely emerge. Thus 
I stick closely to the text of The Constitution of Liberty and to some 
related works by Hayek. Modern search engines, along with 
printed bibliographies, make it fairly easy to identify and often 
access the pertinent secondary literature on Hayek. For conveni- 
ence I follow Hayek’s practice of referring to humanity as ‘man’ 
and to the individual as ‘he,’ rather than switching to gender- 
neutral terminology. 

I owe a debt of gratitude to many persons as well as to several 
institutions. I am grateful first of all to Hayek, who was one of 
my teachers in the University of Chicago’s Committee on Social 
Thought. He also chaired my dissertation committee, whose 
other members were Leo Strauss and Joseph Cropsey. I first met 
Hayek at about the time that he was preparing The Constitution 
of Liberty for publication. Through the years I have received vital 


1 This is not available in the online version. 


25 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


instruction, wise guidance and welcome support from many 
friends. Chief among these are my colleagues in political science at 
the University of Georgia as well as the countless associates whom 
I have met and worked with through the activities of Liberty 
Fund, including the staff of that estimable foundation. There 
are special friends who, over the past year, provided generous 
encouragement as well as helpful advice as I worked on this manu- 
script. Above all I am grateful to my wife, Eva Miller, a cherished 
companion, who for more than five decades and sometimes at 
considerable sacrifice has made it possible for me to engage in a 
scholarly life. 


26 


Hayek's The Constitution of Liberty 


1 HAYEK'S INTRODUCTION 


The Constitution of Liberty begins with a ‘Preface’ and ‘Intro- 
duction,’ but the first thing to strike one’s eye is the title itself. 
One might infer from it that Hayek intends to depict an institu- 
tional arrangement or framework of government that promotes 
liberty; but in fact the book says little about government’s internal 
structure and operations. Later Hayek would clarify the meaning 
of his title: ‘I then used the term “constitution” in the wide sense 
in which we use it also to describe the state of fitness of a person’ 
(i973: 3)- Hayek is concerned with liberty’s present shape or condi- 
tion - whether it is fit or unhealthy. Believing that liberty is in 
dire straits, he will diagnose the causes of its ill constitution and 
prescribe a remedy that might restore its fitness. 

Hayek identifies liberty closely with Western civilisation. The 
principles of liberty or freedom - he uses these terms interchange- 
ably (see 421) - grew out of the Western experience, and the West 
flourished by adhering to them. By the mid-nineteenth century, 
however, the West began to lose faith in the principles of liberty; 
and now it lacks firm beliefs on which to oppose threatening 
ideologies. In various writings Hayek emphasises one or another 
proximate danger to Western liberty - central planning, demands 
for social justice, excesses of majority rule - but the ultimate 
danger is this loss of faith and self-confidence. Hayek is especially 
harsh in his indictment of Western intellectuals, who have long 


29 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


been disillusioned with their own civilisation, disparaging of its 
achievements and drawn to utopianism. They turned away from 
Western principles just as other people of the world were looking 
to the West for guidance, leading the others to draw the wrong 
conclusions about liberty (1-2). 

If the West is to continue on a path of progress, it must renew 
its understanding of liberty and liberty’s value both to society and 
to individuals. To this end Hayek will identify the basic principles 
of liberty and restate them in words suited for today’s climate 
of opinion. Hayek recognises that the task he has in mind must 
go beyond economics and historical inquiry. The contemporary 
situation requires attention to principles that claim ‘universal 
validity.’ It calls for an ‘ultimate justification’ or vindication 
of fundamental values. Economics and historical inquiry can 
certainly illuminate questions of liberty, but no single discipline 
has the comprehensiveness and normative force required to 
put liberty on a sound footing. This task is properly the work of 
‘political philosophy.’ The Constitution of Liberty will undertake ‘a 
comprehensive restatement of the basic principles of a philosophy 
of freedom’ (3). 

Hayek’s discussion of freedom or liberty is divided into three 
main parts: The Value of Freedom; Freedom and the Faw; and 
Freedom in the Welfare State. He explains that Part I ‘endeavors 
to show why we want liberty and what it does.’ Part II examines 
‘the institutions that Western man has developed to secure indi- 
vidual liberty.’ Part III tests this ideal of liberty by applying its 
principles ‘to some of today’s critical economic and social issues’ 
( 5 ). 

Hayek introduces several concepts in his Introduction that 
turn out to be much more important, as his argument unfolds, 


30 


hayek's introduction 


than might appear to be the case at first. I will say a bit about three 
of these: ‘civilisation,’ ‘political philosophy,’ and ‘the ideal.’ 


Civilisation 

Hayek sometimes refers to civilisations, in the plural, and he 
often speaks of the accomplishments of Western civilisation 
and the dangers it currently faces. More broadly, however, he 
understands civilisation as the most recent phase of man’s social 
evolution. It began when men left ‘primitive society’ to adopt an 
urban way of life (340-41). The ceaseless and unguided process 
of social evolution, of which civilisation is a part, seems to be the 
basic reality for Hayek. Some thinkers in the liberal tradition, to 
say nothing of liberalism’s German critics in the nineteenth and 
twentieth centuries, have distinguished sharply between ancient 
and modern civilisation, identifying modernity with the rise and 
flourishing of liberalism. Hayek rejects this bifurcation, since he 
wants to trace liberalism’s core principles - individual freedom 
and the Rule of Faw - to ancient traditions. Also, he appeals to 
older traditions in order to combat the most destructive features 
of modernity, which are associated in some measure with the rise 
of liberalism in the seventeenth century. 

Hayek’s approach raises several questions. Can the oft- 
discussed conflict between ancients and moderns be smoothed 
over in this way? Does Hayek’s concept of a free and open society 
and its way of life retain what is vital to ancient thought - its eleva- 
tion of noble virtues over useful ones? Does Hayek, in the final 
analysis, come down strongly on the side of modernity? Finally, 
how does Hayek relate what is particular in civilisations to what 
is universal? Can he praise the accomplishments of Western 


31 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


civilisation and tie civilisation’s long-term prospects to its fate 
without adopting a parochial mentality? 


Political philosophy 

By the 1930s, Hayek’s broad interests were taking him beyond 
technical questions in economics, but in a direction that his 
discoveries in economics were pointing to. Hayek’s early work on 
the use of dispersed knowledge and the emergence of undesigned 
order (see Hayek, 1937) begins a transformation in Hayek’s schol- 
arly interests that reaches fruition in The Constitution of Liberty, 
where basic questions of political philosophy, especially moral 
questions, are forthrightly addressed. In the early 1940s, Hayek 
had understood his work as social science in the fashion of Max 
Weber (cf. Hayek, 1952b [1979]: 61-9; cf. 41-4). He had mentioned 
political philosophy from time to time, and by 1945 was moving 
in that direction (see Hayek, 1948: 2). Hayek’s post-war writings, 
addresses and organisational efforts reflect a growing anxiety over 
the viability of Western civilisation and the fate of liberty, fore- 
shadowing his deeper commitment to philosophical inquiry (see 
Hayek, 1992). 

Political philosophy, as Hayek describes it in The Constitution 
of Liberty, has a practical as well as a theoretical side. A theoretical 
determination of basic principles is not enough. The philosopher 
must explain those principles to the general public, recommend 
them, make them attractive by showing their loveliness as well 
as their utility, and fight courageously against their enemies. 
Hayek justifies this practical undertaking by reference to the way 
opinion is formed in a free society and the way society progresses. 
Prevailing opinion is not the result of a deliberate decision by a 


32 


hayek's introduction 


majority or by an intellectual elite; instead, it grows out of a spon- 
taneous and continuous process that elevates a minority view to 
a dominant position and then supplants it through the rise of 
another minority view (109-10). Discussion is essential finally to 
the emergence of the dominant view, but first people must learn 
about the alternatives by seeing individuals act them out. 

But how do new ideas originate? The practical politician 
is necessarily ‘unoriginal’ in his beliefs. His task is to find the 
opinions held by the majority, and he moves within this frame- 
work. New ideas come from those few who professionally handle 
abstract ideas, and eventually their ideas shape majority opinion. 
Here Hayek quotes approvingly some well-known passages from 
J. S. Mill and J. M. Keynes to the effect that ‘speculative philos- 
ophy’ (Mill) or ‘the ideas of economists and political philosophers’ 
(Keynes) are, in the long run, far more powerful than interests in 
shaping thought and action. When judged only by his direct influ- 
ence on current affairs, ‘the influence of the political philosopher 
may be negligible,’ but ‘when his ideas have become common 
property, through the work of historians and publicists, teachers 
and writers, and intellectuals generally, they effectively guide 
developments’ (112-13). 

Hayek greatly elevates the philosopher’s historical role by 
insisting that evolution is governed, in the long run, by ‘ideas and 
therefore the men who give currency to new ideas.’ He assigns 
importance not only to the innovators, but also to those thinkers 
who, along the way, provide ‘a set of coherent conceptions’ to 
govern the evolutionary process. Hayek’s own objectives have to 
be understood in this light. He does not claim to be a great inno- 
vator, but rather one who restates old truths coherently. The 
political philosopher must address the question of what ought to 


33 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


be, deciding among conflicting values and defending those which 
seem right to him. The political philosopher should not seek popu- 
larity, but readily oppose the majority will when necessary by 
expressing ‘inconvenient and irksome’ truths. Indeed, he should 
‘suspect himself of failing in his task ... when he finds that his 
opinions are very popular’ (115; cf. vii, 114-15). These characteris- 
tics - eyes focused on the long term, avidly defending sound values, 
unwilling to court popularity, insisting on unfashionable truths, 
persevering in the face of rejection, holding to the belief that the 
right ideas will eventually prevail - apply not only to the political 
philosopher, as Hayek describes him, but also to Hayek himself. 


The ideal 

Hayek refers time and again to the ideal. Recovering basic prin- 
ciples will help him to ‘picture an ideal.’ Hayek’s emphasis on 
the ideal serves two purposes: it shows that liberty is something 
of high value; and it allows him to appeal to something above 
existing or possible arrangements that offers a criterion by which 
to judge them. As we shall see, Hayek’s ‘ideal’ is the Rule of Law. 

Generally Hayek’s writings bring out the quixotic or dangerous 
side of idealism. In this very Introduction he reproaches Western 
intellectuals for their ‘exclusive concern with the creation of 
“better worlds.’” To forestall an immoderate pursuit of liberty, 
Hayek ends his Introduction by warning strongly against ‘perfec- 
tionism.’ Liberalism, properly understood, is far removed from 
‘the hurry and impatience of the passionate reformer.’ It is ‘a 
modest and even humble creed’ with ‘a low opinion of men’s 
wisdom and capacities,’ aware that even the best society we can 
plan for ‘will not satisfy all our desires’ (vii, 1-2, 6, 8). 


34 


hayek's introduction 


Hayek’s understanding of ‘the ideal’ raises a host of ques- 
tions. How do ideals originate? Do we discover them or construct 
them? Are they grounded in what is real? In what sense, if at all, 
are ideals to be understood as transcendent? Can an ideal that is 
distilled from one culture or civilisation be binding for all? These 
questions will be explored in the course of our inquiry. 


35 


PART I 

THE VALUE OF FREEDOM 


37 


2 INDIVIDUAL FREEDOM, COERCION AND 
PROGRESS (CHAPTERS 1-5 AND 9) 


Hayek starts by defining a state of liberty or freedom: ‘We 
are concerned in this book with that condition of men in which 
coercion of some by others is reduced as much as is possible in 
society’ (n). Who are the ‘some’ who must be protected from 
coercion, and who are the ‘others’ who must be restrained? By 
what means can coercion in society be reduced, and how much of 
it will necessarily remain? These are questions that Hayek wrestles 
with throughout The Constitution of Liberty. 


Individual freedom and responsibility 

Freedom, for Hayek, belongs to individual human beings. There 
are several reasons why he begins from ‘the individual.’ 

First, the human individual is the being that chooses, thinks 
and acts; and it is primarily to such an agent that the concept 
of freedom properly applies. Hayek acknowledges that human 
agency raises perplexing questions about the individual’s capacity 
to choose or to will freely; but in defining a condition of freedom, 
it suffices to consider only external impediments to action as they 
might arise not from nature, but from other human beings. 

Second, freedom must be defined by reference to individuals. 
Hayek believes that he is recovering the earliest understanding of 
freedom when he defines it as ‘[t]he state in which a man is not 


39 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


subject to coercion by the arbitrary will of another or others’ 
(n). This definition goes back to the earliest distinction between 
slaves and free men; and it has been affirmed by the best modern 
proponents of liberty, who insist on a free private sphere, defined 
by clear rules and protected from arbitrary coercion, in which the 
individual may pursue his own aims, so long as his actions do not 
violate the freedom of others. Hayek concedes that he is advancing 
a ‘negative’ view of freedom (the absence of coercion), but he also 
insists that such freedom takes on a ‘positive’ character through 
the use that individuals make of it (19). 

Third, a free society cannot exist without free individuals and, 
as Hayek will go on to argue, this requires freedom for all. Some 
collectivist teachings have posited a social or political freedom 
that excludes individual freedom, but Hayek strongly rejects any 
effort to divorce the two. 

Hayek acknowledges that freedom has acquired meanings that 
are quite different from the one he prefers. Individual freedom 
should not be confused with ‘political freedom,’ understood as a 
people’s consenting to a government, participating in legislation, 
or controlling administration. Popular consent and participation 
won’t necessarily secure individual freedom and may work against 

it (13-15). 

Again, individual freedom is not to be understood as exer- 
cising free will or choosing one’s course of action and sticking 
to it. In defining a condition of freedom, the question is whether 
others can impose their will on me, not whether I can follow my 
own will. Hayek recognises, however, that the problem of free will 
is an important one; and he returns to it in Chapter 5, where he 
discusses responsibility. 

Hayek insists that liberty and responsibility cannot be 


40 


NDIVIDUAL FREEDOM, COERCION AND PROGRESS 


separated. Liberty requires that the individual ‘must bear the 
consequences of his actions’ (71). Without responsibility in this 
sense, individuals would be unable to learn from their experiences 
and to enjoy personal growth. Moreover, a free society ‘will not 
function or maintain itself unless its members regard it as right 
that each individual occupy the position that results from his 
action and accept it as due to his own action’ (71). Scientific deter- 
minism teaches, however, that actions result not from one’s own 
free choice, but from circumstances beyond one’s control; and 
many believe that this scientific teaching has destroyed the basis 
for individual responsibility. 

Hayek does not reject determinism altogether. The conception 
of responsibility ‘rests, in fact, on a determinist view’ - the view 
that actions follow from such ‘internal’ causes as emotion and 
habit (73). This raises the question of ‘inner freedom,’ or whether 
internal causes deprive actions of their voluntary character. Hayek 
does not pursue this question, since he is concerned with a deter- 
minist teaching that looks to external rather than internal causes 
of action. This form of determinism is an offshoot of nineteenth- 
century physics. It holds that our actions and mental operations 
are necessarily determined by material circumstances ‘external’ to 
the actor. 

In refuting scientific determinism, Hayek does not try to show 
that it is false, but only that it is wrong pragmatically. It conflicts 
with what we believe to be the case when we urge people to observe 
certain rules. Experience leads me to believe that my admoni- 
tions will make a difference in a person’s conduct, and I want that 
person to believe that he should choose the responsible path; but 
the truth is that neither of us knows whether free choice is possible 
or whether praise and blame can make a difference (72-6). 


41 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


Finally, individual freedom is not to be identified with the 
power to overcome obstacles or to satisfy one’s wishes. The idea 
of ‘liberty as power’ translates easily into a demand for power or 
wealth, as opposed to freedom from coercion (see 13-18). 


The individual and society 

Hayek’s opening approach may suggest that he holds a radi- 
cally individualistic view of man, but this judgement would be 
premature and mistaken. As we shall discover, Hayek goes very 
far in emphasising our dependence on society and the need to 
understand individual actions in light of social relationships. We 
experience other persons in their concreteness and individuality, 
but never apart from their qualities as social beings. 

Hayek’s ‘individual’ is thus a deliberate abstraction from social 
man and the social context of human life. Hayek begins this way 
in order to establish that freedom is the individual’s enjoyment 
of an assured private sphere, safe from interference by others and 
especially from arbitrary coercion by government. It will turn out 
that the human being’s involvement in society and his member- 
ship in a particular community also raise vital issues of coercion; 
but in defining freedom, Hayek wants to defer consideration of 
these issues, and he achieves this by abstracting from man’s social 
and communal relations. 

Hayek’s insistence on the social character of human life shapes 
his understanding of the liberal tradition and his own place in it. 
Hayek emphatically rejects the ‘rationalist’ understanding of the 
individual and society, which many have identified as the original 
and primary form of liberalism. Rationalist theory, as character- 
ised by Hayek, is some blend of John Locke’s ideas, especially as 


42 


NDIVIDUAL FREEDOM, COERCION AND PROGRESS 


interpreted by Locke’s followers in England, France and America, 
and aspects of Bentham’s utilitarianism. The rationalists start 
from the idea of natural liberty, insisting that freedom is each 
individual’s birthright. Moreover, man enjoyed the gift of reason 
from the beginning. Man was ‘originally endowed with both the 
intellectual and the moral attributes that enabled him to fashion 
civilization deliberately’ (59). Morals, language and law were 
inventions of ‘an independently and antecedently existing human 
reason’ (57). Living freely in the ‘state of nature’ and employing 
their reason, men proceeded to design their civil institutions, 
perhaps by entrusting the task to a wise legislator or by entering 
into a social contract. All useful institutions, including the state, 
are ‘deliberate contrivances.’ The rationalists ‘cannot conceive of 
anything serving a human purpose that has not been consciously 
designed’ (61). 

In Hayek’s estimation, these teachings are both erroneous 
and dangerous. They fail to recognise the limits of reason and the 
social dimensions of liberty. To frame his own account of liberal 
principles, Hayek draws on an ‘anti-rationalist’ or ‘empiricist 
evolutionary tradition’ that grew out of English common law, 
Scottish moral philosophy and the reflections of parliamentar- 
ians such as Edmund Burke. This exposition gives Hayek an 
opportunity to bring out the social side of human life. 

The anti-rationalists rejected the idea that man is born free, 
or that freedom is man’s original or natural condition. Human 
beings lived from the beginning in societies that were built around 
the family. Civilisation was not the product of rational design, 
but ‘the accumulated hard-earned result of trial and error’ (60). 
Freedom could develop only after civilisation had tamed and 
checked ‘man’s more primitive and ferocious instincts’ (60). 


43 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


Moreover, civilisation was necessary to man’s development as a 
rational being, for ‘human reason has grown and can successfully 
operate’ only with and within the framework of morals, language 
and law. It follows that free institutions were not constructed to 
fit some rational conception of freedom. Free institutions evolved 
first, and conceptions of liberty came later as these institutions 
were studied (57-60). 

When Hayek refers to ‘classical liberalism,’ he means the form 
it took in the nineteenth century, after the anti-rationalism of 
thinkers such as Hume, Adam Smith and Burke became widely 
influential. His broad aim is to recover and restate classical 
liberalism as thus understood. Besides emphasising the social 
dimension of human life, classical liberalism developed ideas 
about markets that Adam Smith and other evolutionists had put 
forward. It did not envision unbridled individualism or complete 
laissez-faire - a doctrine that belongs to the French rationalist 
tradition and was never defended by any of the English classical 
economists. The evolutionists’ argument was ‘never antistate as 
such, or anarchistic.’ It ‘accounted both for the proper functions 
of the state and for the limits of state action’ (60; cf. 1973: 61-2; 
1976: 54)- 


Limiting state coercion 

Hayek acknowledges that his definition of freedom is incomplete 
so long as coercion remains undefined. He thus examines various 
ways of defining coercion, but the deeper question is why it is 
desirable for the individual to have a sphere of freedom in which 
coercion is reduced to a minimum. 

Unlike romantics who imagine that society can flourish 


44 


NDIVIDUAL FREEDOM, COERCION AND PROGRESS 


without coercive government, Hayek insists that state coercion 
is required to prevent private persons from coercing each other 
(21). This does not mean that all private coercion can be elimin- 
ated. Hayek grants, for example, that coercion of a subtle kind - 
psychological pressures to give in to another’s moods or demands 
- often occurs in private relationships that individuals enter into 
voluntarily, but for the state to regulate or restrict such choices 
would involve even greater coercion: ‘if people are to be free to 
choose their associates and intimates, the coercion that arises 
from voluntary association cannot be the concern of government’ 
(138). 

The state monopolises coercion under all forms of govern- 
ment; but in a free society, the exercise of government’s coercive 
power is constrained and made predictable by general rules that 
apply equally to all individuals, including those who make and 
enforce the laws. Conformity to law is the primary safeguard 
against arbitrary government - a point that Hayek will develop at 
length in discussing the Rule of Law. We note that while the law is 
constraining, it is not in itself coercive. 

Coercion by the state is indispensable to freedom, but Hayek 
wants to reduce the need for it to a minimum. This is possible only 
where individuals can be expected to conform voluntarily to tradi- 
tional rules of conduct and, in particular, to common moral rules. 
Evolved moral rules, as distinct from synthetically constructed 
ones, should thus be regarded with reverence and held as a matter 
of sincere belief. Hayek follows ‘all the great apostles of freedom 
outside the rationalistic school’ in emphasising that ‘freedom has 
never worked without deeply ingrained moral beliefs’ (62). 

Is our conformity to moral rules truly voluntary, or is it 
simply produced by a different kind of coercion or compulsion 


45 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


to that imposed by the state? As Hayek explains it, we conform 
to moral rules mostly from habit, but social pressure to do so 
is often intense. J. S. Mill had regarded such conformity as the 
most pressing contemporary threat to freedom, greater even 
than the threat of state coercion (Mill, 1975: 57-69). Hayek is less 
concerned than Mill with protecting private conduct ‘from the 
pressure of opinion or disapproval.’ Mill, in strongly attacking 
this so-called moral coercion, ‘probably overstated the case for 
liberty’ (146; cf. 435, n. 32). In Hayek’s view, it is better ‘not to 
represent as coercion the pressure that public approval or disap- 
proval exerts to secure obedience to moral rules and conventions’ 
(146). 

Hayek thinks that ‘a free society will function successfully only 
if the individuals are in some measure guided by common values;’ 
and this is why he is willing for society to exert pressure on indi- 
viduals to conform to moral rules. Nonetheless, he doesn’t want 
this pressure to interfere with the individual’s freedom of choice. 
We must recognise that ‘each person has his own scale of values 
which we ought to respect, even if we do not approve of it.’ If we 
believe in freedom, we will not ‘regard ourselves as the ultimate 
judges of another person’s values’ or ‘feel entitled to prevent him 
from pursuing ends which we disapprove of so long as he does not 
infringe the equally protected sphere of others.’ A society that fails 
to recognise these principles ‘can have no respect for the dignity of 
the individual and cannot really know freedom’ (79). 


46 


Freedom of action 

What is to count as coercion, especially the arbitrary kind that 
encroaches on individual freedom? Hayek certainly wishes to 


NDIVIDUAL FREEDOM, COERCION AND PROGRESS 


protect individuals and their property from physical harm, but 
his primary emphasis is on assuring the individual’s freedom of 
action. Inflicting physical harm, or threatening it, is a form of 
coercion, but so is interference with free action. Freedom of action 
includes economic liberty, but it is wider than this. For Hayek, it 
encompasses the individual’s freedom to plan his own life and to 
carry out that plan. Recognising that this requires extensive infor- 
mation, Hayek defines coercion broadly to include the manipu- 
lation of a person’s environment by such means as deception 
or withholding vital facts. Coercion, in this wider sense, is ‘the 
control of the essential data of an individual’s action by another’ 
( 139 )- 

In extending this freedom to every individual, Hayek implicitly 
follows the principle, famously articulated by Kant, that human 
individuals are to be regarded as ends and not as a means only. A 
person who is coerced no longer pursues his own ends or plan of 
life, but must act according to ends or goals that are imposed by 
someone else. In so acting I become merely a means to another’s 
end. I still exercise choice, but ‘my mind is made someone else’s 
tool, because the alternatives before me have been so manipulated 
that the conduct that the coercer wants me to choose becomes 
for me the least painful one’ (133). I have been deprived of the use 
of my intelligence and knowledge in the pursuit of my own aims 
( 134 ). 

But why is it beneficial that the individual should be free to 
pursue his own ends or life plan? Hayek is somewhat vague about 
the benefit that the individual himself gains from such freedom. 
He does not justify it as a path to success in amassing property, 
winning acclaim, cultivating virtue, or attaining happiness: ‘we 
must recognize that we may be free and yet miserable’ (18). Hayek 


47 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


requires a justification that upholds freedom even if the individual 
is unsuccessful in attaining his ends or, should he succeed, finds 
their attainment unappealing. His solution is to emphasise the 
value of striving and learning: 

What matters is the successful striving for what at each 
moment seems attainable. It is not the fruits of past 
success but the living in and for the future in which 
human intelligence proves itself. Progress is movement for 
movement’s sake, for it is in the process of learning, and 
in the effects of having learned something new, that man 
enjoys the gift of his intelligence. (41) 

This principle - that progress is continuous striving and 
learning - applies both to the individual and to humanity at large. 


Freedom and progress 

Individuals cherish freedom of action and benefit personally 
from it, but Hayek’s case for individual freedom rests on broader 
considerations: ‘It is not because we like to be able to do particular 
things, not because we regard any particular freedom as essential 
to our happiness, that we have a claim to freedom’ (32). Hayek’s 
broader argument for individual freedom comes to light particu- 
larly in Chapters 2 and 3, where he emphasises its contribution to 
society at large and to the progress of civilisation. 

Hayek prepares the ground for this broader argument by 
insisting that I may benefit much more from the way other indi- 
viduals use their freedom than from how I use my own. In fact, 
the benefits which I derive from freedom are ‘largely the result of 
the uses of freedom by others, and mostly of those uses of freedom 
that I could never avail myself of’ (32). The useful contributions of 


48 


NDIVIDUAL FREEDOM, COERCION AND PROGRESS 


even a few individuals can be of immense value to their contem- 
poraries. Indeed, the freedom ‘that will be used by only one man 
in a million may be more important to society and more beneficial 
to the majority than any freedom that we all use’ (31). This result 
does not require disinterested or benevolent actions, although it 
may proceed from such motives. Typically the actor, in seeking to 
benefit himself, also benefits unknown persons without intending 
to do so or foreseeing this result. 

Hayek continues this argument by calling attention, as he 
often does, to our fundamental ignorance. I can never know which 
particular individuals will use their freedom so as to benefit me 
and the rest of society. Certainly I cannot identify in advance 
that ‘one man in a million’ whose contribution will be immense. 
Hayek describes freedom as ‘opportunity for the unknown few’ 
(533)- Only by extending freedom as broadly as possible can we 
provide an opportunity for these unknown benefactors to use 
their freedom effectively. Since no one has sufficient knowledge 
to pick and choose such individuals, freedom must be given to all. 

From here Hayek proceeds to show that individual freedom is 
essential to the long-term growth of civilisation and the advance 
of humanity at large. The progress of civilisation depends on 
man’s freedom to experiment with new ways of doing things. Here 
again, no one can predict in advance which ‘experiment in living’ 
will move civilisation ahead. Progress cannot be designed: ‘it is 
not achieved by human reason striving by known means toward 
a fixed aim.’ Progress ‘always leads into the unknown.’ At most 
we can only expect ‘to gain an understanding of the kind of forces’ 
that bring about undesigned growth and try to create conditions 
that are favourable to it (40). 

Earlier we took note of Hayek’s insistence that a free society is 


49 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


a traditional society - one whose members regard their evolved 
traditions with respect and even reverence. Yet if a society is to 
survive and grow, it must adapt to changing conditions; and this 
requires freedom to experiment and innovate. Some individuals 
or groups must deviate from or go beyond established rules and 
try something new. Civilisation grows through a process of trial 
and error, and innovators are indispensable to this process. 

Innovation begins as a response to changes in a society’s 
material environment. Some of these changes can be dealt with 
by temporarily adjusting practices and resource use, while others 
will require lasting modifications in tools and institutions (32-3). 
When Hayek speaks of adaptation (a central concept in his 
account of social evolution), he has these latter cases primarily in 
mind. Without innovation, our adaptation to changing circum- 
stances would be impossible. Innovation introduces new ways of 
doing things. These new ways compete with old ones and with 
each other. If a new way proves to be effective, others may imitate 
it. As Hayek explains, ‘the selection by imitation of successful 
institutions and habits’ is decisive for social evolution (59). Soci- 
ety’s growth in the past has depended on an unconscious process 
of trying new things, learning, imitation, selection and adaptation; 
and this remains largely true even with the emergence of reason. 

Hayek explains intellectual progress in terms of this broader 
process of social evolution. Advances in thought depend funda- 
mentally on man’s unconscious adaptation to changed material 
conditions and thus on freedom of action. Intellectual liberty - 
freedom of thought, research and communication - is ‘significant 
only in the last stage of the process in which new truths are discov- 
ered.’ Scientists understand that intellectual progress results from 
new ideas; and most realise that advances in knowledge cannot 


50 


NDIVIDUAL FREEDOM, COERCION AND PROGRESS 


be planned in advance, since they ‘often spring from the unfore- 
seen and undesigned.’ What they are apt to overlook is that new 
ideas depend on innovative actions and thus on ‘the freedom of 
doing things.’ In Hayek’s view, the intellectual process ‘is in effect 
only a process of elaboration, selection, and elimination of ideas 
already formed’ in our daily conduct of practical affairs. The flow 
of new ideas ‘to a great extent, springs from the sphere in which 
action, often non-rational action, and material events impinge 
upon each other.’ It would ‘dry up if freedom were confined to the 
intellectual sphere.’ Since thinking depends on doing, ‘[fjreedom 
of action, even in humble things, is as important as freedom of 
thought’ (33-5). 


Progress as radical change 

The Constitution of Liberty might leave the impression that progress 
is mostly gradual, smooth and cumulative. Does Hayek recognise 
that progress often involves sharp discontinuities, destructive 
negations and radical transformations? 

Hegel’s dialectical account of history offers one such view of 
progress. Hayek emphatically rejects the Hegelian dialectic, espe- 
cially as it is restated by Marx, but without specifically criticising 
the idea that progress occurs through negation and sublation. His 
attack centres instead on Hegel’s rationalism and determinism, 
i.e. the insistence that historical progress is governed by a fixed 
law that is both necessary in its operations and intelligible to 
reason. The main features of Hayek’s own evolutionary theory - 
no determining law, the indispensability of free action, no known 
goal of progress, the impossibility of understanding fully how 
progress works or making specific predictions about its direction 


51 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


- are intended to counter Hegelian and Marxist dialectics (Hayek, 
1952b [1979]: 367-400). 

Another challenge to the idea that progress flows smoothly 

- one that avoids Hegelian assumptions about a fixed law of 
progress - can be found in some influential depictions of modern 
technology. These hold that social change is driven by the relent- 
less advance of innovative technologies that inevitably under- 
mine obsolete customs and institutions. Joseph Schumpeter, who 
developed an early version of this view, famously spoke of tech- 
nological advance as ‘creative destruction,’ thereby incorporating 
both Marx’s theory of revolution and Nietzsche’s insistence that 
the creative individual - the innovator - must also be a destroyer 
(see Schumpeter, 1950: 31-2, 41-3, 81-6; Nietzsche, 1954: 170-72). 
Modern technology, thus understood, would seem to be at odds 
with traditional society of the kind Hayek favours. 

Hayek grants that modern progress depends on the rapid 
advance of technology, which inevitably leaves destruction in its 
wake, thus producing losers as well as winners. He had noted this 
earlier in describing the Industrial Revolution and the social alter- 
ations it produced in England. While benefiting the great majority 
of workers, the Industrial Revolution ‘destroyed’ the privileged 
position and power of the upper classes and endangered ‘certain 
aesthetic and moral values’ to which these classes attached great 
importance (1954: 25-7). Hayek grants that most people are likely 
to be averse to progress, since while ‘bringing them much they 
strive for,’ progress also ‘forces on them many changes they do not 
want at all.’ The point, however, is that the spread of technology 
has ‘largely deprived us of the choice as to whether or not we want 
continued rapid progress’ (51-2). 

Why are Westerners today ‘not only the creatures but the 


52 


NDIVIDUAL FREEDOM, COERCION AND PROGRESS 


captives of progress’? Why does ‘the peace of the world and, with 
it civilization itself... depend on continued progress at a fast rate’? 
Hayek concludes Chapter 4 by warning that advanced technology, 
vital to the West’s prosperity, can be turned against it in the form 
of destructive weaponry. Hayek is not proposing an arms race, but 
rather making a demonstration of technology’s promise. A great 
proportion of the world’s people, dissatisfied with their own lot, 
think they can prosper by redistributing Western wealth - a belief 
that reflects the influence of Western ideas. Moreover, the spread 
of technology has given these disgruntled peoples a new power 
to destroy Western nations; and ‘[a]s their strength grows, they 
will become able to extort such redistribution’ unless the West 
can show that the best way to increase overall wealth is through 
peaceful progress (52-3). 


53 


3 THE USE AND LIMITS OF KNOWLEDGE 
(CHAPTERS 2, 3, 4) 


Hayek’s teaching on human knowledge provides the foun- 
dation for his political philosophy. His key concepts are defined 
substantially by reference to knowing. Liberty is having access 
to the information needed to design and follow one’s plan of life. 
Tradition is knowledge in the form of accumulated experience. 
Progress is the advance of knowledge. For Hayek, determining 
what we cannot know - the limits to human knowledge - is as 
important as discovering what is knowable. Time and again he 
calls attention to our fundamental ignorance and builds argu- 
ments around our lack of knowledge. In fact, he insists that the 
‘case for individual freedom rests chiefly on the recognition of 
the inevitable ignorance of all of us concerning a great many of 
the factors on which the achievement of our ends and welfare 
depends’ (29). 

Reflections on knowledge appear throughout Chapters 2, 
3 and 4 of The Constitution of Liberty, interwoven with themes 
that we considered in the previous chapter. The task now is to 
reconstruct Hayek’s teaching on knowledge and explore its key 
elements. Hayek had long argued that the individual possesses 
only a small amount of the knowledge required for success in 
daily life and thus must ‘make use of more knowledge than he has 
himself acquired’ (22). In the first two sections of this chapter, I 
consider the mechanisms that make available for our use the 


54 


THE USE AND LIMITS OF KNOWLEDGE 


knowledge possessed by others. Our using others’ knowledge 
is possible because individuals participate in an order that they 
did not create and whose ultimate workings they cannot under- 
stand. Thus in the third section I examine Hayek’s discussion of 
order - how it originates and works to our advantage. The fourth 
section explores Hayek’s account of reason and shows how it rests 
on his evolutionary conception of mind. The concluding sections 
consider how knowledge is embodied in traditions, values and 
moral rules. 


Using inherited knowledge: rules and traditions 

What specific mechanisms make it possible for us to use the 
knowledge of others? Hayek makes a start on identifying these 
mechanisms near the beginning of Chapter 2, where he distin- 
guishes between 1) ‘the transmission in time of our accumulated 
stock of knowledge,’ and 2) ‘the communication among contem- 
poraries of information on which they base their action’ (27). 
The difference, viewed from the actor’s standpoint, is this: past 
knowledge becomes available for use largely by our conforming to 
rules, while we make use of contemporaneous knowledge largely 
by responding to signs. 

In the West particularly, the advance of science is a 
conspicuous and vital way in which knowledge is transmitted 
through time; but from the standpoint of man’s evolution, the 
transmission of various tools, customs and institutions has been 
much more important. All these examples involve a compli- 
ance with rules. Hayek insists that rule-governed behaviour long 
preceded the use of reason and language, so it need not be delib- 
erate or even something of which one is conscious. For a very long 


55 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


time rules were no more than behavioural dispositions. Their 
articulation in speech and in writing came very late in the process 
of human evolution; and even now, our compliance with rules has 
mostly a subconscious and habitual character. 

Hayek frames the story of human evolution in terms of the 
genesis, diffusion and transmission of rules. Elements of this 
story appear in The Constitution of Liberty, but it is presented much 
more clearly in later writings. In his most detailed account of the 
matter, Hayek identifies three stages of evolution, each of which 
involves rule-governed behaviour, but with great variation in both 
the character of the rules and the behaviour itself. This account is 
necessarily conjectural, since it looks back at least a million years, 
long before the beginnings of recorded history. 

Hayek speculates that primitive society consisted of small 
bands of 15 to 40 persons, who lived by hunting and gathering. 
Its rules were nothing more than instinctive dispositions to act 
in ways that favoured group solidarity and survival. How did 
general rules emerge? Hayek attaches great importance to the 
mind’s facility of treating particulars as members of a class - what 
he calls ‘abstraction.’ Verbal statements are a clear example, but 
so are our behavioural responses. Abstraction ‘manifests itself 
also in the way in which we respond similarly to any one of a 
class of events which in most respects may be very different from 
one another, and the feelings which are evoked by those events 
and which guide our action, be it a sense of justice or of moral or 
aesthetic approval or disapproval’ (40, 452, n. 4; cf. Hayek, 1952a: 
142-6; and Hayek, 1978a: 35-49). This subconscious, responsive 
form of abstraction developed as human beings moved through 
different social structures; and the most efficient of these abstract 
behavioural rules were spread through imitation (observers 


56 


THE USE AND LIMITS OF KNOWLEDGE 


acquired the rule by imitating particular actions that exemplified 
it) and were enforced by social pressures. The verbal articulation 
of learnt rules began about eight thousand years ago, and written 
codes of morality and law are much more recent. Even after these 
developments, subconscious abstraction would continue to exert 
a dominant influence on human action (see 61-7, 148-9, 151-2; 
Hayek, 1973: 17-21, 74-6; Hayek, 1979: 159-61). 

Our present stock of knowledge consists in large degree of 
rules that we have acquired through habit, custom and tradition. 
Social evolution tends to be cumulative, so that traces of earlier 
rules are brought forward into the present, where they exist in a 
layered or stratified form. 


Using contemporaneous knowledge: imitation, prices 
and esteem 

Transmission in time is one of the ways by which knowledge 
becomes available for our use. The other way is through commu- 
nication among contemporaries, three examples of which are: a) 
‘individuals imitating those who have been more successful;’ b) 
individuals being guided by ‘prices offered for their products;’ and 
c) individuals responding to ‘expressions of moral or aesthetic 
esteem for their having observed standards of conduct’ (28-9). 
All three processes are vital to civilisation. Imitation is essential 
to society’s adaptive evolution, where ‘the decisive factor is not the 
selection of the physical and inheritable properties of the individ- 
uals but the selection by imitation of successful institutions and 
habits’ (59). Prices convey vital information about the economic 
behaviour of dispersed individuals. Signs of approval or disap- 
proval promote conformity to rules. 


57 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


Hayek had long been interested in the way prices convey infor- 
mation. In writings dating back to the 1930s, he had emphasised 
the indispensability of prices to economic life (see 1948: 33-56). 
The most influential of these writings is his 1945 essay ‘The Use 
of Knowledge in Society.’ This essay takes up ‘the economic 
problem of society’ and argues that it ‘can be solved, and in fact 
is being solved, by the price system’ (ibid.: 77, 85). Hayek points 
out that rapid adaptation to social change requires knowledge 
of the particular circumstances of time and place; but this know- 
ledge, which is dispersed among countless individuals, cannot be 
concentrated in a single mind or planning board. The problem 
then is to find a way to put dispersed knowledge to use for every- 
one’s advantage. In a free society, the price system solves this 
problem by ensuring ‘that the knowledge of the particular circum- 
stances of time and place will be promptly utilized.’ Moreover, it 
communicates to the individual ‘such further information as he 
needs to fit his decisions into the whole pattern of changes of the 
larger economic system’ (83-4). Hayek concludes by observing 
that the economic problem is but part of a broader one, i.e. the 
need for processes to overcome ‘the unavoidable imperfection of 
man’s knowledge’ (91). Indeed, this broader problem ‘arises in 
connection with nearly all truly social phenomena, with language 
and most of our cultural inheritance, and constitutes really the 
central theoretical problem of all social science’ (88). 

Hayek here anticipates the more comprehensive treatment of 
the use of knowledge that he offers in The Constitution of Liberty 
(see 4). As it turns out, attentiveness to prices is one way, but not 
the only way, that we overcome the imperfection of our know- 
ledge by making use of what others know. In fact, The Constitu- 
tion of Liberty has much more to say about imitation and about the 


58 


THE USE AND LIMITS OF KNOWLEDGE 


salience of moral approval and disapproval than about the price 
mechanism. 

In the 1945 essay, and sometimes also in The Constitution of 
Liberty, Hayek employs this interesting formulation: the price 
system allows the individual to use knowledge that he does not 
possess; prices signal what countless individuals know of their 
own local situations; and I can use them in my own calculations 
without actually possessing the dispersed knowledge that they 
reflect. Whether this formulation would also cover our use of 
traditional rules as well as instances of communication other than 
the price system (imitation, responding to signs of approval and 
disapproval) is uncertain. In conforming to tradition, arguably 
we would possess the rule either as a subconscious habit or as a 
conscious precept, although the reasons for the rule - the experi- 
ences from which it originated and through which it survived a 
long process of cultural selection - are unknown to us and there- 
fore not in our possession. For the most part rules are followed 
blindly, without consideration of the reasons for them. The same 
may be largely true of our responses to approval and disapproval. 
Hayek does indicate, however, that as social evolution advances, 
imitation may come to have an element of deliberation and choice. 


Knowledge and social order 

In daily life we rely on rules and signs and take for granted the 
knowledge they make available for our use. By acting on such 
knowledge, we are able to carry out our own plans and to antici- 
pate what to expect from others. All of this is to assume that the 
social world is orderly, but where does this order come from and 
what is its character? 


59 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


Accounting for order is a central aim of Hayek’s political 
philosophy, but his discussion of it in The Constitution of Liberty 
is quite diffuse as compared with later presentations, where he 
distinguishes quite clearly between the order that men deliber- 
ately make (‘organisation’) and order that forms itself (‘sponta- 
neous order’). Both kinds of order are essential to civilisation (see 
1964). 

Hayek is widely known for his advocacy of the idea of sponta- 
neous order. He briefly discusses the concept itself at two points 
in The Constitution of Liberty, although the idea of spontaneous 
growth is present in his discussions of tradition, liberty and 
progress. Hayek’s comments about organisation as a source of 
order are scattered elsewhere in the book, so the relationship of 
spontaneous and constructed order is not developed thematically. 

Hayek’s first description of spontaneous order, though not by 
that name, comes in Chapter 4, where he examines the contribu- 
tion of eighteenth-century British thinkers to our understanding 
of progress. These thinkers, especially David Hume, Adam Smith 
and Adam Ferguson, addressed the following question: how can 
social order emerge, if not from a designing human intelligence or 
that of a superior being? In addressing it, they 

showed how, in the relations among men, complex and 
orderly and, in a very definite sense, purposive institutions 
might grow up which owed little to design, which were not 
invented but arose from the separate actions of many men 
who did not know what they were doing. (58-9) 

The Scots in particular saw that the orderly growth of institu- 
tions takes place through ‘adaptive evolution’ or ‘the survival of 
the successful’ (59, 57). Those tools and institutions survive which 


60 


THE USE AND LIMITS OF KNOWLEDGE 


have proven themselves superior (60). This insight was central to 
the British case for freedom, which held that the value of freedom 
‘consists mainly in the opportunity it provides for the growth of 
the undesigned’ (61). 

It must be emphasised that in embracing the idea of evolu- 
tion, Hayek has in mind social or cultural evolution as antici- 
pated in the teachings of eighteenth-century thinkers, particularly 
the Scots, and not physical evolution as taught later by Charles 
Darwin and others. What is crucial to cultural evolution is not the 
selection and transmission of physical characteristics, but rather 
the selection and transmission of values or rules of conduct. 
Cultural evolution takes place through a process of ‘winnowing 
and sifting,’ and where it will lead is unknowable and thus 
unpredictable. Certainly it does not exhibit an intelligible law. 
Its tendency, however, is to produce orders or structures that 
reflect ‘the differential advantages gained by groups from prac- 
tices adopted for some unknown and perhaps purely accidental 
reasons’ (1979: 155; cf. 153-9, 196-200). 

Hayek returns to spontaneous order at the very end of Chapter 
10, where he draws a parallel between natural and social order. 
Often in the physical world we must ‘rely on the spontaneous 
adjustments of individual elements to produce a physical order.’ 
For example, we ‘could never produce a crystal or a complex 
organic compound if we had to place each individual molecule 
or atom in the appropriate place in relation to the others;’ yet 
because the individual molecules or atoms obey a law of nature, 
they will in certain conditions ‘arrange themselves in a structure 
possessing certain characteristics’ (160). Hayek reasons that spon- 
taneous forces can likewise produce human society when indi- 
viduals act in accordance with general rules or laws. Lawmakers 


61 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


can promote social order by establishing the conditions for it, but 
cannot do so by trying to arrange individuals in an orderly way. 
Thus the lawmaker’s task ‘is not to set up a particular order but 
merely to create conditions in which an orderly arrangement can 
estabhsh and ever renew itself’ (161). 

Hayek draws support here from Michael Polanyi, who speaks 
of ‘the spontaneous formation of a “polycentric order.’” Polanyi 
explains that such order ‘is achieved among human beings by 
allowing them to interact with each other on their own initiative 
- subject only to the laws which uniformly apply to all of them.’ 
Their individual efforts are coordinated ‘by exercising their indi- 
vidual initiative;’ and ‘this self-coordination justifies this liberty 
on public grounds’ (160). 

As for deliberate organisation, Hayek acknowledges that a free 
society ‘produces institutions in which, for those who prefer it, a 
man’s advancement depends on the judgment of some superior 
or of the majority of his fellows.’ Business firms and government 
agencies would be leading examples of such institutions. Here 
individuals are subject to the orders of their superiors, and their 
place in the organisation depends on someone else’s judgement of 
their contribution or their merit (99). 

Hayek emphasises that his argument for liberty ‘is not an 
argument against organization, which is one of the most powerful 
means that human reason can employ.’ What he principally 
objects to are, first, monopolistic organisations that are exclusive, 
privileged and coercive, and second, any attempt to impose on 
society at large the organisational pattern, with individuals being 
assigned to positions according to a single comprehensive scale of 
merit. He faults the French rationalist tradition in particular for 
seeking ‘the highest degree of political civilization in organization, 


62 


THE USE AND LIMITS OF KNOWLEDGE 


that is, in the highest degree of interference by public power’ (55). 
So long as the growth of organisations ‘does not produce a situ- 
ation in which a single comprehensive scale of merit is imposed 
upon the whole society, so long as a multiplicity of organizations 
compete with one another in offering different prospects, this 
is not merely compatible with freedom but extends the range of 
choice open to the individual’ (99). 

The wide availability of useful knowledge, as transmitted 
through rules and communicated though signs, attests to an order 
that, while not intelligible itself, is the source of intelligibility in our 
daily lives. This order, speaking broadly, is what Hayek means by 
‘civilisation,’ understood as the direction of man’s social evolution 
since the advent of cities, about eight thousand years ago. Civilisa- 
tion is an artificial order, generated spontaneously by countless indi- 
vidual actions but not designed or instituted by anyone. It requires 
adaptations to material conditions that nature imposes, but is not a 
product of natural growth. Organisations play an indispensable role 
within this undesigned order, but can never hope to replace it. 


Reason, mind and civilisation 

Hayek seeks to defend reason, properly understood, against 
rationalism: ‘Reason undoubtedly is man’s most precious posses- 
sion,’ but it has been abused by persons who greatly exaggerate 
its powers (69). In The Constitution of Liberty, Hayek uses the term 
‘anti-rationalist’ to identify his preferred position (see 57, 61, 63, 
69, 437), but as he came to recognise, this usage obscures his true 
intention. After all, Britain’s so-called anti-rationalists were not 
opposed to reason, but wanted to make reason more effective by 
establishing its proper limits. Thus in later writings he drops this 


63 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


term, declaring it to be a dangerous and misleading expression that 
ought to be avoided. The rationalist/anti-rationalist distinction is 
replaced by one between two kinds of rationalism, which Hayek 
calls ‘constructivist’ and ‘critical.’ His own position, and that of the 
evolutionary tradition from which he draws, is renamed ‘critical 
rationalism’ - a term borrowed from Karl Popper (1967: 94). 

In order to bring out reason’s limits, Hayek offers a critique 
of reason. This critique moves at two levels, one of which is much 
more radical than the other. At the less radical level, Hayek insists 
on the pervasiveness of human ignorance and shows that reason 
can neither supply the knowledge required for daily life nor 
explain the processes that make such knowledge available for our 
use. At a second and more damaging level, he depreciates reason 
itself, first by subordinating reason to the subconscious mind and 
then by submerging mind into the process of civilisation. 

Hayek knew that rationalism, both ancient and modern, 
had taken its bearings by a natural order whose principles are 
constant and intelligible to the human mind. In one way or 
another, it had taught that reason can transcend the here and 
now, the opinions of the time, to apprehend the unchanging 
truth of things, including the good and beautiful. Ancient and 
medieval rationalists in particular had taught that essential quali- 
ties of the world itself are captured by the concepts employed in 
reasoning. Knowledge of nature, especially human nature, would 
provide a timeless standard by reference to which human affairs 
could be ordered. Hayek regards these rationalist views as both 
wrong theoretically and dangerous from a practical standpoint. 
He wants to foreclose any appeal to nature that might call tradi- 
tion into question, or undercut the existing order, or fuel reckless 
change by stimulating a taste for ‘perfectionism.’ 


64 


THE USE AND LIMITS OF KNOWLEDGE 


Hayek aims to discredit rationalist theories of this sort 
through his evolutionary account of mind. By his account, the 
human mind evolved slowly for a million years or more before 
reason finally emerged. Even now, our actions depend much more 
on habit and unthinking responses to signs than on the kind of 
knowledge that an individual mind ‘consciously manipulates’ 
(24). Man’s mind is thus ‘a product of the civilization in which 
he has grown up and ... he is unaware of much of the experience 
which has shaped it - experience that assists it by being embodied 
in the habits, conventions, language, and moral beliefs which are 
part of its makeup’ (24). What mind has and will become depend 
on the process of civilisation. Civilisation preserves and transmits 
general rules and beliefs, and the individual mind is a collection 
of them. This is not to say that the mind is merely passive. Besides 
classifying sense data, it has ‘the capacity to restrain instincts.’ 
Without such restraints, civilisation could never develop (1988: 
22; cf. 1979: 160). 

Hayek was greatly influenced by the historicisation of the 
mind that occurred in German thought in the late nineteenth 
century - a development that would, over the next century, 
transform the way scholars understood human knowing and 
reasoning. This was a time when historians and anthropologists 
were able to argue, from abundant data, that beliefs and world- 
views vary greatly from one society or civilisation to another. Such 
data alone was insufficient, however, to support the claim that the 
mind itself changes. For this a theory of knowledge was required. 

This new theory began from Kant’s principle that ultimate 
being is unknowable to reason, because we perceive it only as 
filtered through the mind’s categories. Nature, as known to us, 
is already a product of a mental transformation and not a true 


65 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


picture of ultimate being. Hayek himself presents such a view 
in The Sensory Order. The individual mind is here described as a 
complex of relations in the central nervous system that classifies 
sense perceptions according to some interpretive framework. This 
means that sense data are never perceived by us in a raw or direct 
form. What we perceive are things with distinct qualities; and 
such perceptions have already been formed by the mind’s clas- 
sificatory and interpretive operations. The mind’s perceptions of 
reality are necessarily interpretations in line with some classifica- 
tory scheme (see 1952a; also Miller, 1972: 250-64). 

Radical historicism, however, took a second and more far- 
reaching step. If the mind is essentially historical, this means 
that the categories of thought also change, so that reality itself is 
understood differently according to time and place. Moreover, 
there is no final or privileged epoch of the kind Hegel posits, in 
which reason reaches perfection by understanding the historical 
process as a whole. Human thought necessarily understands 
reality from some point of view. There are many such viewpoints, 
and no particular one has a justifiable claim to finality. 

In his writings from the 1940s and early 1950s, Hayek strongly 
opposes the historicist claim that ‘the human mind is itself 
variable’ and holds instead that ‘all mind must run in terms 
of certain universal categories of thought’ (1952b [1979]: 133, 
136). In The Constitution of Liberty, however, Hayek appears to 
change course, declaring that man’s mind ‘is itself a system that 
constantly changes as a result of his endeavor to adapt himself to 
his surroundings’ (23). A few years later, he explains that ‘man’s 
capacity to think is not a natural endowment of the individual but 
a cultural heritage, something transmitted not biologically but 
through example and teaching - mainly through, and implicit in, 


66 


THE USE AND LIMITS OF KNOWLEDGE 


the teaching of language.’ Much more than we are yet aware of, 
language probably ‘determines our whole manner of thinking and 
our view and interpretation of the world.’ Our language furnishes 
us with a ‘picture of the world’ or framework of thought, which 
presumably includes the mind’s basic concepts or categories 
(1967: 86-7). Given the plurality of languages, there must be many 
world pictures or frameworks for understanding reality; and 
these must be changeable, since language is part of a culture, and 
culture changes. 

Hayek leaves very much in doubt the possibility that reason, 
linked as it is to the evolution of mind and civilisation, can ever 
achieve a view of reality that has a justifiable claim to finality. Such 
a view would seem to be impossible from within the historical 
process; and if history has no end, there would appear to be no 
final or privileged standpoint that would permit reason to grasp 
timeless principles. One must wonder, however, if such a teaching 
can accommodate Hayek’s own ambitious programme, which 
puts forward a synoptic view of mind, civilization, order and 
liberty with a considerable degree of finality. 


Values 

The concept of ‘values’ is pivotal to Hayek’s overall account of 
knowledge and to his defence of freedom. Later we will see that 
Hayek’s ‘ideal’ embodies a very specific set of values. In this 
section I want to make three points. First, Hayek rejected the 
fact-value dichotomy, even when it was widely accepted by social 
scientists. Second, Hayek understands values in terms of rules to 
be followed rather than as particular ends to be pursued by the 
rational will. Third, Hayek would become increasingly concerned 


67 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


with the sources of values and would look to his theory of social 
evolution to identify these sources. 

(1) As for the fact-value dichotomy, Hayek denies that sense 
data, particularly as defined by natural science, constitute mean- 
ingful facts. In the 1940s, he had undertaken to show that the 
social sciences cannot possibly succeed in their task of under- 
standing social reality if they limit themselves to facts as defined 
by natural science: ‘our data must be man and the physical world 
as they appear to men whose actions we try to explain’ (1952b 
[1979]: 60). Hayek here emphasises that the facts of the social 
sciences are merely ‘beliefs or opinions held by particular people 
... irrespective of whether they are true or false’ (ibid.: 47). 

The important point to note here is that people’s ordinary 
beliefs and opinions about the world - the starting point for social 
science - are suffused with values. The facts of the social sciences 
are inseparable from values, and social inquiry cannot abstract 
from them, as natural science attempts to do. In The Constitu- 
tion of Liberty, as in these earlier writings, Hayek emphasises the 
centrality of values to all social life. He would continue decades 
later to insist that values are ‘the indispensable foundation of all 
our civilization,’ including all our efforts at rational construction 
and science (1973: 6-7). 

(2) Hayek’s reservations about theories of action that centre 
on the exercise of will and on means/ends calculation are more 
or less implicit in The Constitution of Liberty, but they are devel- 
oped elsewhere. In sum, he associates such theories with construc- 
tivist rationalism, inasmuch as they ‘attempt to assess an action 
by its foreseeable results in the particular case,’ based on what 
is presumed to be an ‘incontrovertible knowledge of cause and 
effect.’ From the rationalist standpoint, values are understood as 


68 


THE USE AND LIMITS OF KNOWLEDGE 


‘the concrete ends which determine [the individual’s] actions at 
particular moments.’ Projecting into the future and drawing on its 
presumed knowledge of cause and effect, the rational will suppos- 
edly deduces the best means of achieving the desired end. 

Hayek, by contrast, denies the will’s autonomy and subor- 
dinates it to habit. Values are not particular concrete ends, but 
general rules that are embodied in tradition and opinion. These 
rules, derived from countless centuries of human experience, 
tell us what is permissible or impermissible insofar as action is 
concerned. They ‘confine our actions to the limited range within 
which we are able to foresee relevant consequences’ and also 
prevent us ‘from overstepping these limits.’ In fact, it is because 
of such boundaries that our causal knowledge about the likely 
consequences of a particular course of action can serve us effect- 
ively. These rules enable the individual actor, when caught up in 
the emotions of the moment, ‘to avoid actions of a kind whose 
foreseeable results seemed desirable, but which were likely to lead 
to the destruction of the order on which the achievements of the 
human race rested’ (see 1978a: 82-8). 

(3) As we see, values are indispensable to action, but where 
do they come from? Hayek insists on the ‘givenness of the value 
framework,’ by which he means that each of us is born into some 
system of values - one that ‘supplies the end which our reason 
must serve.’ When Hayek declares that we ‘must always work 
inside a framework of both values and institutions which is not 
of our own making,’ he is referring to an evolving framework 
and not to one that reflects absolute eternal values (63). So long 
as reason remains within this given framework, it can provide 
useful clarifications and also formulate rules or laws that imple- 
ment sound values, but it cannot be the originating source of 


69 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


values. Rationalism’s hope of replacing tradition with a ‘deliber- 
ately constructed, synthetic system of morals’ is destined to fail 

(65). 

Even though some particular value framework is ‘given’ for 
each society, Hayek, in his theory of social evolution, does look 
behind this ‘givenness’ for the primary sources of all values. 
Values are general rules, and these may arise from man’s biolog- 
ical instincts, from cumulative experience and from conscious 
articulation. Instinctive values predominate in the earliest soci- 
eties, while the conscious articulation of values comes about only 
with the advent of civilisation. Traditions in the strict sense - 
those rules that arise from cumulative experience and are followed 
habitually and unconsciously - develop in society from the begin- 
ning and cannot be replaced by rules or laws that people frame 
deliberately (see Hayek’s 1978 Hobhouse Lecture, ‘The Three 
Sources of Human Values,’ which appears as an epilogue to the 
third volume of Law, Legislation and Liberty [1979]). 

Hayek employs this framework to explain the modern discon- 
tent with civilisation and to criticise socialism. Instinctive values, 
which emphasised sharing, care for one’s neighbours, and sacri- 
fice for the common good, were suited for sustaining very small 
communities. With the advent of urban life and civilisation, 
traditions and rules evolved that favoured a large and impersonal 
extended order, or commercial society. The problem is that ‘in 
some respects man’s biological equipment has not kept pace with 
that rapid change, that the adaptation of his non-rational part has 
lagged somewhat, and that many of his instincts and emotions are 
still more adapted to the life of a hunter than to life in civilization.’ 
This maladaptation has given rise to an instinctive dissatisfaction 
with civilised life - the sense that it is ‘unnatural’ - and to all ‘the 


70 


THE USE AND LIMITS OF KNOWLEDGE 


familiar complaints against industrialism, capitalism, or overre- 
finement’ (40). 

Hayek wants to underscore the indispensability of habitual 
or customary rules for the kind of civilisation that we now enjoy. 
Strictly speaking, the term ‘tradition’ refers to rules of this kind. 
Hayek acknowledges, of course, that deliberately articulated rules 
are indispensable to the progress of modern civilisation - the 
Rule of Law attests to that - but these are not to be understood as 
novel constructions. Their continuity with rules that have evolved 
through trial and error over a long period of time is crucial to their 
effectiveness. 

Hayek’s distinction between three kinds of values (instinctive, 
traditional, articulated) ties in closely with his critique of 
socialism. A free society rests on tradition-based values, but 
these are jeopardised both by our instinctual promptings and 
by rationalist ambitions. Socialism, in Hayek’s view, exemplifies 
both dangers. On the one hand, socialists cast tradition aside and 
prefer constructed rules to ones that have evolved. On the other 
hand, socialism is ‘an atavism,’ i.e. it wants to re-establish society 
on instinct-based values such as solidarity and social justice. 
Socialism is a form of primitivism. It is fundamentally at odds 
with those values that make possible large societies, civilisation 
and human freedom (1976: 143-50; 1978a: 57-68; 1979: 165-76; 
1988: 11-37). It is an enemy of the extended, rule-governed, open 
society, or what Hayek, in Law, Legislation and Liberty, calls ‘the 
Great Society’ (1973: 2; 1976: 107-13; 1988: 19-21, 104). 


Moral rules 

The most important values, for Hayek, are the general rules 


71 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


embodied in a society’s traditions and beliefs as well as in man’s 
own unconscious habits. Within the totality of such rules or 
values, Hayek distinguishes moral values from the rest. Moral 
values are rules of social conduct; and Hayek insists that we have 
‘no choice but to submit’ to such rules, even though we might 
not know the rationale for them or see ‘that anything important 
depends on their being observed in the particular instance.’ Moral 
rules address us as unconditional demands and not as expedient 
options: ‘At any one stage of our evolution, the system of values 
into which we are born supplies the ends which our reason must 
serve.’ Moral rules thus resemble Kant’s categorical imperative, 
but of course they are products of social evolution and not formu- 
lations of the rational will. Even Kantian ethics is derivative from a 
prior tradition, i.e. it is an extension of ‘the basic idea underlying 
the rule of law’ (62-6; 196-7). 

Insofar as possible, Hayek wants to make tradition and moral 
rules self-legitimising. The alternative - to have their legitimacy 
dependent on something else - is both unattractive to him and 
contrary to his understanding of moral experience. He could, for 
example, argue that we ought to obey traditional rules because in 
doing so we promote a larger end. This would, however, require 
the everyday actor to think like a social theorist. As Hayek writes 
later, ‘acting individuals usually do not understand’ the ‘functions’ 
of cultural rules that emerge spontaneously (1979: 155). A social 
theorist such as Hayek does take an instrumentalist view, because 
he sees that obedience to moral rules produces spontaneous order 
and also determines whether an evolving society will survive and 
prosper in the long run. The theorist recognises that ‘the ultimate 
decision about what is good or bad will be made not by individual 
human wisdom but by the decline of the groups that have adhered 


72 


THE USE AND LIMITS OF KNOWLEDGE 


to the “wrong” beliefs’ (35-6). Social actors, however, perceive 
moral rules as ‘a value in itself’ and do not require instrumentalist 
or expedient reasons for obeying them. 

Another way to legitimise traditional rules would be to seek 
support from religion, but Hayek, as a scientist, had refused 
throughout his career to take this path. He rejects all causal expla- 
nations that appeal to invisible essences or hidden spiritual forces, 
since these amount to superstition. Nevertheless, he concedes that 
there are ‘good reasons why any person who wants to live and act 
successfully in society must accept many common beliefs, though 
the value of these reasons may have little to do with their demon- 
strative truth.’ This requirement ‘applies to all our values,’ but ‘it 
is most important in the case of moral rules of conduct’ (64-5). 

In this guarded and even cryptic statement, Hayek is silent 
as to whether these ‘common beliefs’ have a religious character 
and whether they might serve to legitimise the moral rules to 
which they are attached. Much later, in The Fatal Conceit, Hayek 
addresses these issues directly. He wonders whether he has 
underestimated the role of religious belief in sustaining benefi- 
cial customs: ‘even an agnostic ought to concede that we owe our 
morals, and the tradition that has provided not only our civiliza- 
tion but our very lives, to the acceptance of claims that are scientif- 
ically unacceptable, such as those advanced by religion’ (1988: 137). 
In an appendix, he cites favourably Sir James Frazer’s argument 
that superstition rendered humanity a great service by protecting 
marriage and private property (ibid.: 157). Of course, traditional 
rules cannot be self-legitimising if they must depend on the 
authority of religion (or superstition) to uphold their authority. 

Hayek seeks not only to describe the role that values play 
in social life, but above all to justify a particular set of values, as 


73 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


portrayed in his ‘ideal.’ Later I will consider Hayek’s ideal and its 
foundations, but now we must sum up what we learn about moral 
obligation from his discussion of values. 

Ordinary morality is based on an unquestioned imperative to 
obey established rules, but this is not Hayek’s last word on moral 
obligation as such. First of all, it leaves no room for novelty, which 
is essential to the progress of civilisation. Often it is desirable that 
the individual should be able to transgress established moral rules 
- voluntary ones and not those imposed coercively by the state - 
‘when it seems to him worthwhile to incur the odium which this 
will cause.’ Furthermore, the social pressure enforcing these rules 
should be variable, so as to ‘allow for gradual and experimental 
change’ (63). Where individuals and groups simultaneously 
observe partially different rules, there is a greater opportunity 
‘for the selection of the more effective ones’ (63). Such flexibility 
makes gradual evolution and spontaneous growth possible and 
permits modification and improvements in light of new experi- 
ence (63). Clearly civilised life is marked by a tension between the 
traditional and the novel. A question left open here is the source 
of the innovator’s values. 

Taking the long view, Hayek insists that a process of selection 
is at work in society’s evolution, winnowing out moral rules that 
might be destructive to society and preserving those that favour its 
survival or persistence. Sometimes he speaks of broader achieve- 
ments, such as ‘success,’ but he stops well short of Nietzsche’s 
idea that every people creates and honours those values that make 
them ‘rule and triumph and shine, to the awe and envy of their 
neighbors’ (Nietzsche, 1954: 170). For Hayek, the will to survive, 
and not the will to power, drives the evolutionary process. 

Hayek’s moral principles are no derivative from evolutionary 


74 


THE USE AND LIMITS OF KNOWLEDGE 


theory. Individuals cannot possibly be under an imperative to 
follow moral rules that will, in the long run, ensure society’s 
survival or success, since the future is unpredictable. Only rarely 
can we know what the eventual results of our actions will be. Even 
when a group or nation follows the teachings of what it regards as 
its best men, it may ‘destroy itself by the moral beliefs to which it 
adheres.’ When it comes to the values that preserve society, these 
are selected by an impersonal evolutionary process and not by 
far-sighted individuals. Imagining that we can foresee or plan the 
future is a rationalistic illusion. The best we can do is to maintain 
a free society, where individuals can choose among competing 
ideals, and to cultivate diverse human capacities. In such a society, 
destructive tendencies are ‘self-corrective,’ since ‘groups guided 
by “impractical” ideals would decline, and others, less moral by 
current standards, would take their place’ (67). 

I close on a cautionary note. Hayek provides two separate and 
somewhat different accounts of value in The Constitution of Liberty. 
The first account - the one that we have just now explored - is 
developed chiefly in Chapter 4, in connection with the discussion 
of tradition, moral rules and opinion. Here Hayek emphasises that 
moral rules typically demand unconditional obedience from the 
individual and that social pressure to conform to moral rules is 
both potent and beneficial. The second discussion of value comes 
in Chapter 6, in connection with a discussion of justice and its 
relation to economics. Here Hayek insists that society values the 
‘results’ of the individual’s actions more than his moral merit, 
implying some relaxation in conformist pressures. The two discus- 
sions differ in tone, if not in substance, although both strongly 
defend freedom of action. Whether their discussions of values and 
moral rules can be reconciled remains to be seen. 


75 


4 EQUALITY, FREEDOM AND JUST 

DISTRIBUTION (CHAPTERS 4, 6 AND 8) 


Chapter 6, ‘Equality, Value, and Merit,’ is essentially about 
justice, even though the chapter’s title and organisation fail to 
make this clear. To understand the chapter’s central argument, 
it helps to distinguish, as Hayek himself does, between distribu- 
tive and commutative justice (440-41, n. 10 and n. 11; cf. 232). As 
Hayek notes, this distinction among kinds of justice goes back 
to Aristotle and the Greeks. Commutative justice is concerned 
principally with agreements or contracts among private individ- 
uals and their proper enforcement. Distributive justice involves 
the distribution of the community’s goods by those who have 
authority over those goods. 

Chapter 6 is concerned with distributive justice, and Hayek’s 
aim is to discredit the idea that it should be the organising principle 
of society. Hayek will argue that neither human equality nor human 
merit is a proper basis for distributing the community’s goods. In 
fact, government has no business deciding how wealth should be 
distributed among individuals. Of course, wealth does somehow get 
distributed, and Hayek must provide an alternative to distribution 
by government. His solution is to rely on economic freedom and the 
market. The market distributes goods according to the ‘value’ of indi- 
viduals and not according to principles of equality and merit. This 
argument requires, however, that Hayek define value in such a way 
that it does not mean moral merit, in the sense discussed in Chapter 4. 


76 


EQUALITY, FREEDOM AND JUST DISTRIBUTION 


Are individuals equal? 

Hayek’s critique of egalitarianism begins by affirming a kind 
of equality: ‘The great aim of the struggle for liberty has been 
equality before the law.’ Law is here understood to include two 
kinds of general rules: those enforced by the state and those 
bearing on moral and social conduct that we obey voluntarily. 
Liberty requires the equal application of both kinds of rules. 
The equality of state-enforced rules is discussed later in connec- 
tion with the Rule of Law. As for equal rules of moral and social 
conduct, Hayek has in mind what Tocqueville called the manners 
or mores of democratic society, as distinguished from those of an 
aristocracy (see Tocqueville, 2000: 45-53, 535-41). Democratic 
manners require that individuals relate to each other as equals 
and not in terms of social rank or status. 

This equality of the general rules of law and conduct is, in 
Hayek’s estimation, ‘the only kind of equality conducive to liberty 
and the only equality which we can secure without destroying 
liberty’ (85). One might think that equality before the law presup- 
poses an underlying equality of some sort among individuals to 
whom the law applies, but Hayek seems to deny that this is the 
case: if we are to understand the meaning of equality before the 
law, ‘the first requirement is that we free ourselves from the belief 
in factual equality’ (87). ‘[T]he factual equality of all men’ is obvi- 
ously an ‘untrue ... assumption’ (86). What Hayek means by 
‘factual equality’ is unclear, but at least it includes the belief that 
‘all men are born equal’ (87). In dismissing this tenet as factually 
untrue, Hayek rejects a key principle of early liberalism, whose 
case for equality before the law was grounded in natural rights 
that individuals are born with and possess equally as human 
beings. 


77 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


The relevant fact about human beings is not equality but 
difference: ‘It is of the essence of the demand for equality before 
the law that people should be treated alike in spite of the fact that 
they are different’ (86). By ‘difference,’ Hayek means primarily 
the inequalities among people that arise from both ‘nature’ and 
‘nurture.’ Nature does not make individuals equal, but it does 
make them unequal in capacities, talents and such. As for nurture, 
social life, especially the family, produces inequalities that give 
some individuals an advantage over others. 

We must pause to wonder whether Hayek’s case for freedom 
doesn’t require a natural or inherent equality among individuals 
and whether, in repudiating this idea, he jeopardises his own 
position. 

First, the very idea of ‘the individual’ - the human being shorn 
of all qualities that make him different from others - is an egali- 
tarian concept, especially when it is interpreted to mean that each 
individual should enjoy equal freedom in his own private sphere. 
Second, Hayek builds his case for freedom on the principle that 
each individual should be free to pursue his own aims or plan of 
life. If another forces me to submit to his will, he is using me as a 
means to his end and thus is violating my freedom: ‘Coercion is 
evil precisely because it thus eliminates an individual as a thinking 
and valuing person and makes him a bare tool in the achievement 
of the ends of another’ (21). 

This argument requires a moral imperative of the kind that 
Kant articulated - namely, that human beings must always be 
treated as an end and not merely as a means to someone else’s 
purposes. At one point Hayek writes: ‘A society that does not 
recognize that each individual has values of his own which he 
is entitled to follow can have no respect for the dignity of the 


78 


EQUALITY, FREEDOM AND JUST DISTRIBUTION 


individual and cannot really know freedom’ (79). Where does 
this individual entitlement to one’s own values come from, and 
why is it true that individuals as such have a ‘dignity’ that we must 
respect? We are touching here on Hayek’s ultimate justification 
for freedom. He is mostly silent on the matter, apparently because 
of a reluctance to acknowledge that human beings are in some 
fundamental ways inherently equal. 

While some aspects of democratic society are disturbing to 
Hayek, he speaks favourably of egalitarian manners: The ‘exten- 
sion of the principle of equality to the rules of moral and social 
conduct is the chief expression of what is commonly called the 
democratic spirit - and probably that aspect of it that does 
most to make inoffensive the inequalities that liberty necessarily 
produces’ (85). By the same token, Hayek opposes social arrange- 
ments based on class privilege and extreme differences in wealth: 

One may well feel attracted to a community in which there 
are no extreme contrasts between rich and poor and may 
welcome the fact that the general increase in wealth seems 
gradually to reduce these differences. I fully share these 
feelings and certainly regard the degree of social equality 
that the United States has achieved as wholly admirable. 

(87-8) 

One might favour ‘more even or more just distribution’ 
while rejecting coercive means to bring this about. Indeed, social 
equality can be a valid policy consideration: ‘Wherever there is 
a legitimate need for government action and we have to choose 
between different methods of satisfying such a need, those that 
incidentally also reduce inequality may well be preferable.’ For 
example, the law of intestate succession might be so framed as to 
favour equality. Lest he be misunderstood, Hayek concludes these 


79 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


remarks by emphasising once again that coercion should not to be 
used to bring about substantive equality (87-8). 

Hayek clearly prefers what Tocqueville called a democratic 
social condition to an aristocratic one, although like Tocqueville 
he would insist that this condition exhibit the principle of free 
competition rather than the spirit of envy. Clearly he wants to 
avoid a society polarised between the wealthy and the poor. This 
means encouraging a broad middle class, which has sufficient 
wealth to look out for itself and avoid dependency on government. 
One basis for his opposition to inflationary policies is that they 
devalue savings and tend to destroy the middle class (see 338). 


Inequality, law and freedom 

Individuals differ from each other because of inherent and 
acquired qualities that make them unequal. These inequalities, 
and the advantages they convey, should be protected by legal 
and customary rules. Hayek opposes efforts to neutralise them 
by coercive means, whether to provide ‘equality of opportunity’ 
or to assure substantively equal outcomes. Such actions violate 
‘the basic postulate of a free society, namely, the limitation of all 
coercion by equal law.’ Moreover, they would require a weighing 
of human potentialities; but no man or group of men has such 
a capacity, and certainly no one should be trusted invariably to 
exercise it (88). In a free society, ‘economic inequality is not one of 
the evils which justify our resorting to discriminatory coercion or 
privilege as a remedy’ (87-8). 

Equality before the law not only protects inequality, but - by 
freeing individuals to use their talents and industry to gain their 
own ends - increases it. As Hayek observes, the ‘equality before 


80 


EQUALITY, FREEDOM AND JUST DISTRIBUTION 


the law which freedom requires leads to material inequality.’ 
Again, liberty is ‘bound to produce inequality in many respects’ 
(87, 85). 

Hayek recognises that a defence of liberty requires some justi- 
fication for the advantages that it permits some people to enjoy. 
One approach would be to show that liberty serves the good of 
individuals by allowing those who are talented and enterprising 
to get ahead. Hayek does make such an argument in The Constitu- 
tion of Liberty, but here he emphasises how society itself benefits 
from this inequality. He argues, for example, that the inequality 
resulting from individual liberty provides society with valuable 
information. It demonstrates ‘that some manners of living are 
more successful than others’ (85). Another point is that ‘the acqui- 
sition by any member of the community of additional capacities 
to do things which may be valuable must always be regarded as 
a gain for that community’ (88). Indeed, ‘society is likely to get 
a better elite’ if some fortunate individuals are able to acquire 
valuable qualities through family nurture and inheritance (90). 

From Hayek’s standpoint, any coercive action by the state to 
assure equality of outcomes is a violation of individual liberty. The 
same is true of coercive efforts to secure ‘equality of opportunity.’ 
Hayek defends several institutions - the family, rules of inherit- 
ance, education - against egalitarian demands to reform them for 
the sake of equal opportunity. In each case he argues that society 
benefits when each member starts with as many advantages as 
possible. 

It is important to note that Hayek is not opposed to equal 
opportunity as such, but only to certain egalitarian applications of 
this principle. He points out that classical liberalism, at its height, 
had demanded ‘that all man-made obstacles to the rise of some 


81 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


should be removed, that all privileges of individuals should be 
abolished, and that what the state contributed to the chance of 
improving one’s conditions should be the same for all.’ Liberals 
had held that ‘all should be allowed to try,’ but recognised that 
individual differences will give some an advantage over others. 
The more recent view - the one that Hayek opposes - insists that 
‘all must be assured an equal start and the same prospects.’ This 
approach requires governmental intervention and adjustments 
that curb individual freedom (92-3). Hayek strongly defends the 
older understanding of opportunity: 

Let us by all means endeavor to increase opportunities 
for all. But we ought to do so in the full knowledge that 
to increase opportunities for all is likely to favor those 
better able to take advantage of them and may often at 
first increase inequalities. Where the demand for ‘equality 
of opportunity’ leads to attempts to eliminate such ‘unfair 
advantages,’ it is only likely to do harm. All human 
differences, whether they are differences in natural gifts 
or in opportunities, create unfair advantages. But, since 
the chief contribution of any individual is to make the best 
use of the accidents he encounters, success must to a great 
extent be a matter of chance. (388) 


Benefits of inequality 

Hayek offers a justification for inequality in several places in The 
Constitution of Liberty. In Chapter 3, he provides a spirited defence 
of inequality as indispensable to civilisation’s progress. Since a 
rising standard of life depends more on an increase in knowledge 
than on the accumulation of capital, one might expect Hayek to 
defend primarily the scientists or inventors who lead the way 


82 


EQUALITY, FREEDOM AND JUST DISTRIBUTION 


in discovering useful knowledge. Here, however, he defends the 
position of the rich, whose way of life contributes a kind of unin- 
tended knowledge that is indispensable to progress. Their contri- 
bution is to experiment ‘with a style of living that will eventually 
be available to many.’ Hayek avoids any distinction here between 
legitimate and illegitimate wealth, regardless of its source, amount 
or use. The rich teach the rest, but inadvertently and by example 
rather than by purposeful instruction. 

To defend inequalities of wealth, Hayek contends that ‘[tjhere 
is no way of making generally accessible new and still expensive 
ways of living except by their being initially practiced by some.’ 
Thus ‘in any phase of progress the rich, by experimenting with 
new styles of living not yet accessible to the poor, perform a neces- 
sary service without which the advance of the poor would be very 
much slower.’ As the poor seek to imitate the lifestyle of the rich, 
the cost of producing new goods comes down, so that eventu- 
ally they become affordable to many. Indeed, ‘[ejven the poorest 
today owe their relative material well-being to the results of past 
inequality.’ Meanwhile, the rich are beginning to enjoy new goods 
that will be sought by the masses some decades hence. Hayek 
insists that his is a valid argument and not some ‘far-fetched and 
cynical apologetics.’ Even so, he concedes that it will not assuage 
those who fail to achieve the desired results or feel ‘the pain of 
unfulfilled desire aroused by the example of others’ (44-5). This 
of course gives rise to problems of justice and envy in democratic 
societies. 

Hayek goes on to apply this argument to the international 
scene, holding that the poor nations learn much from the rich 
ones and, by aspiring to imitate them, contribute both to their 
own progress and to that of civilisation. His key point here is 


83 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


that the advantage of the West is due mainly to its ‘more effec- 
tive utilization of knowledge’ and not to ‘a greater accumulation 
of capital.’ This knowledge has cost the leading nations much to 
obtain, but it is a ‘free gift’ to those who follow, enabling them ‘to 
reach the same level at a much smaller cost’ (46-7). 

In Chapter 8, Hayek makes a case for ‘the man of independent 
means’ and for entrepreneurs in particular. He points out that 
in modern democratic society, ‘most of us work as employed 
members of large organizations, using resources we do not own 
and acting largely on the instructions given by others’ (118). The 
principles of freedom were developed, however, in a society where 
most people, and particularly the influential ones, ‘were inde- 
pendent in the activities that gave them their livelihood.’ The 
question is whether the interests and outlook of employed persons 
are supportive of a free society. Hayek thinks that the fact of being 
employed not only affects a person’s ‘initiative and inventiveness,’ 
but also greatly limits his knowledge ‘of the responsibilities of 
those who control resources,’ including the allocation of capital 
(122). Moreover, people tend to choose employment, rather 
than independence, because they ‘want the relative security and 
absence of risk, and responsibility that an employed position 
brings,’ or because they expect that employment will offer a larger 
income and a more satisfying activity (120). The employee is likely 
to think that his income should depend on his merit, not on the 
results of his initiatives. 

These developments have had a great impact on modern 
politics. Not surprisingly, the employed prefer a paternalistic 
government, a ‘higher tutelary power’ that will provide a broad 
range of social services and oversee ‘the directing activities which 
they do not understand but on which their livelihood depends’ 


84 


EQUALITY, FREEDOM AND JUST DISTRIBUTION 


(123). They are attracted to the idea that the state, in taxing and 
in providing services, should aim for social justice. They come to 
regard persons who make their living by employing capital as a 
privileged class or special interest ‘which can justly be discriminated 
against’ (123). Little do they realise that their own opportunities for 
employment ultimately depend on ‘the existence of independent 
individuals who can take the initiative in the continuous process of 
re-forming and redirecting organizations’ (124). 

Men of independent means are essential to preserving 
competitive enterprise, but their most important contribution to 
a free society is the leadership they provide, especially ‘in the field 
of cultural amenities, in the fine arts, in education and research, 
in the preservation of natural beauty and historic treasures, and 
above all, in the propagation of new ideas in politics, morals, 
and religion’ (125). From this standpoint Hayek defends not only 
entrepreneurs, but also a leisured class, whose members likely will 
have grown up to appreciate non-material goods and also to feel 
an obligation to take the lead in intellectual, moral and artistic 
affairs. In most of the USA, this class has almost completely disap- 
peared, so that businessmen now lack intellectual leadership and 
have no ‘coherent and defensible philosophy of life.’ A progres- 
sive society requires ‘a cultural elite within the propertied class’ 
(128-9). 


Merit and value 

Hayek’s underlying concern in Chapter 6 is the problem of distrib- 
utive justice. Already he has shown that government must not, 
as a matter of law, distribute goods to persons according to the 
principle of equality. This leaves open, however, the possibility 


85 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


that unequal distributions may be warranted. Hayek knew of the 
important tradition in moral philosophy which holds that unequal 
distributions are just if they are based on the relative merit of the 
recipients. To complete his case against state-sponsored distribu- 
tive justice, Hayek must now rule out the option of distributing 
material goods according to personal merit. This leads him to 
draw a crucial distinction between ‘merit’ and ‘value.’ 

In Chapter 4, Hayek had described the meritorious person 
as one who complies with established moral rules. Society pres- 
sures individuals to behave morally and it praises or blames them, 
depending on whether or not they do so. Hayek writes: ‘How we 
value another person will necessarily depend on what his values 
are’ (79). In Chapter 6, however, he argues that we mostly leave 
morality aside in valuing other persons and look primarily at the 
results of their actions. Looking at both chapters together, we see 
that Hayek uses the term ‘value’ in a generic sense to include both 
value as merit and value as results: ‘Though moral value or merit 
is a species of value, not all value is moral value, and most of our 
judgments of value are not moral judgments’ (98). 

Hayek’s distinction between merit and value can be illustrated 
by an example. Suppose that someone has acted with a view to 
achieving a result. Value is to be found in the action’s results, as 
assessed by others. Merit, by contrast, is an attribute of the actor’s 
conduct - namely, the moral attribute that makes the conduct 
worthy of praise. Merit is disconnected from whether or not an 
action achieves its intended result. It lies in the actor’s ‘subjec- 
tive effort’ and not in the action’s ‘objective outcome.’ Conduct 
can thus be meritorious even if unsuccessful and thus lacking in 
value. By the same token, successful conduct can be valuable, even 
though it lacks merit (94-5). 


86 


EQUALITY, FREEDOM AND JUST DISTRIBUTION 


Merit, as Hayek describes it, rests on two conditions: the 
actor must do ‘what some accepted rule of conduct’ demands of 
him; and the action must have ‘cost him some pain and effort.’ 
By making merit relative to variable rules of conduct, Hayek turns 
away from traditional moral philosophy, which typically had 
sought a single standard of merit by referring to human nature. 
Hayek’s second condition - that meritorious action requires some 
pain and effort - implies such a standard, but unlike traditional 
thinkers, he takes this requirement as a reason to belittle striving 
for merit: ‘The fact is, of course, that we do not wish people to earn 
a maximum of merit but to achieve a maximum of usefulness at a 
minimum of pain and sacrifice and therefore a minimum of merit’ 
(96). Hayek illustrates this point with the example of an accom- 
plished surgeon who is able to achieve a good result with ease, 
because of many years of arduous practice: ‘we feel that we are 
doing justice if we recompense value rendered with equal value, 
without inquiring what it might have cost the particular indi- 
vidual to supply us with these services’ (97). By separating value 
from merit, Hayek implies that one should follow the convenient 
path, which is usefulness to others at little cost to oneself, and not 
the arduous path of moral virtue (see 81-3). 

Making material rewards conform to merit might be feasible 
for an organisation, but this is both impracticable and undesir- 
able for society at large. Basing rewards on merit would require 
a determination of each individual’s ‘subjective effort,’ including 
the use made of opportunities and the degree of effort and self- 
denial. Even in the unlikely event that such determinations were 
successful, the results would be incompatible with a free society. 
Everyone’s success would require that others approve their moral 
conduct, thus injuring disfavoured groups and reducing the 


87 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


incentive for individuals to pursue the outcomes that they think 
best. Moreover, some authority would have to assign rewards for 
merit. 

Value is assigned not by central authority but by the market: 
‘The market will generally offer for services of any kind the value 
they will have for those who benefit from them’ (96). Market- 
based rewards stimulate individual efforts and extend economic 
freedom to productive groups that might lack general approval 
for their conduct. Judgements of individual merit are subjective, 
but value is an ‘objective outcome,’ based on the results of one’s 
actions and dispersed assessments of their benefits. Since the 
market generally assures that value is rewarded, government’s 
role is primarily to facilitate market distributions by maintaining 
the rule of law. Certainly it has no business pursuing social justice 
(96-100; cf. 80-83). 


88 


5 MAJORITY RULE AND LIMITED 

GOVERNMENT (CHAPTERS 7 AND 10) 


The problem of reconciling liberalism with democracy is 
one of Hayek’s chief concerns in The Constitution of Liberty. The 
problem is this: liberalism is a doctrine about human liberty or 
freedom and how to protect and extend it by setting limits to 
government. Democracy, as understood by many theorists and as 
often practised, subordinates liberty to the quest for equality. Can 
liberty flourish where the people are sovereign and the will of the 
majority prevails? Hayek turns now to the question of majority 
rule and its limits. 


Majority rule and the community 

Democratic government can be structured in different ways, 
and Hayek is quite vague here as to the kind of arrangement that 
he chiefly has in mind. The idea of majority rule presupposes 
some collectivity within which this rule takes place. Any group, 
of course, can entrust decision-making authority to a majority 
of its members; but not every group or collectivity is decisive for 
political life. Hayek has different ways of identifying the politically 
relevant group - state, country, society - but the one he settles on is 
‘the community.’ As we get deeper into The Constitution of Liberty, 
it becomes clear that Hayek assigns vast powers to the community 
and gives it a surprisingly important role in political life. 


89 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


Hayek explains that ‘the authority of democratic decision rests 
on its being made by the majority of a community which is held 
together by certain beliefs common to most members.’ Indeed, ‘it 
is the acceptance of such common principles that makes a collec- 
tion of people a community.’ Hayek goes on to insist that majority 
rule must be consistent with the community’s common beliefs 
or principles and cannot override them: ‘it is necessary that the 
majority submit to these common principles even when it may 
be in its immediate interest to violate them.’ The key point is that 
‘the power of the majority is limited by those commonly held prin- 
ciples and that there is no legitimate power beyond them’ (106-7). 

This formulation raises two problems that we must consider. 
First, in what sense does ‘the majority of a community’ make the 
authoritative decisions in a democracy? Second, does it make a 
difference what opinions or beliefs a community holds? 

Various seventeenth-century doctrines of community lie in the 
background of Hayek’s political thought, especially those deriving 
from Locke and from Rousseau. For Locke, individuals form a 
particular commonwealth when they leave the state of nature, to 
be governed ‘by such Rules as the Community, or those author- 
ized by them to that purpose, shall agree on’ ( Second Treatise, no. 
127). The community, by the consent of the majority, entrusts 
power to a government, which provides for ‘establish’d standing 
Laws, promulgated and known to the People;’ for ‘indifferent and 
upright Judges,’ who will decide controversies by those laws; and 
for a power that will execute those laws at home and secure the 
community against foreign invasion (no. 131). The majority of 
the community, which has ‘the whole power of the Community, 
naturally in them,’ may choose among several forms of govern- 
ment. It may decide to itself ‘imploy all that power in making 


90 


MAJORITY RULE AND LIMITED GOVERNMENT 


Laws for the Community from time to time, and Executing those 
Laws by Officers of their own appointing.’ In this case, ‘the Form 
of the Government is a perfect Democracy.’ The majority may, 
however, choose from other forms: an oligarchy, consisting of ‘a 
few select Men, and their Heirs or Successors;’ a monarchy, either 
hereditary or elected; or some mixed form of government that is 
compounded from these (no. 132). The point is that majority rule 
may occur at either of two levels: the majority’s decision as to the 
form of government (which need not be a democracy); and the 
majority’s exercise of political power (if it decides to institute a 
democratic form). 

Rousseau’s innovation is to insist that the community must 
retain the lawmaking power and not delegate it to others. What 
can be delegated is only the power of government or the executive 
power (see On the Social Contract, II: 1-6). Like Rousseau, Hayek 
distinguishes sharply between lawmaking and governing. He 
also commends Rousseau for understanding that the laws must 
always be general in form (194; also Hayek, 1992: 251-2). Hayek is 
highly critical, however, of other teachings of Rousseau, including 
his insistence that law is an act of will by the community (Hayek, 
1973: 25; cf. 1976: 147)- 

More recent majoritarian conceptions of democracy offer still 
another way to understand majority rule. Unlike Rousseau, these 
conceptions assign legislative power to a representative legisla- 
ture, but hold that the elected representatives should enact the 
specific policies favoured by a majority of the community. The 
people’s representatives make the law (presumably by a majority 
vote), but the law’s direction is determined by majority opinion in 
the community. 

In Hayek’s case, one must decide whether he is speaking 


91 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


of majority rule by the community or by a legislative body. The 
liberal and the democratic traditions agree that ‘whenever state 
action is required, and particularly whenever coercive rules have 
to be laid down, the decision ought to be made by the majority’ 
(ro6). Hayek accepts this requirement, but it does not specify the 
level or levels at which majority rule should occur. In the present 
chapter, Hayek seems mostly to have in mind the formation of 
majority opinion within community itself, which will then ‘guide’ 
or ‘direct’ the actions of government (t09). Implicitly he takes the 
view that community opinion, as determined by the majority, is 
binding on government. 


Limited and arbitrary government 

The liberal tradition, following ancient writers, had identified 
several alternative forms of government. The ancients taught 
that these forms differ fundamentally from each other, since they 
empower different types of human beings; and their primary 
concern was to decide which form is best in itself as well as best 
under given conditions. With the advent of liberalism, attention 
shifted from essential or qualitative differences among the forms 
of rule to what all governments chiefly have in common, namely a 
quantity of power and a tendency to abuse it. The urgent problem 
became one of making government safe by limiting its power; and 
the key distinction came to be one between ‘limited’ and ‘arbi- 
trary’ government. The alternative forms of rule were now seen in 
this light. Since all governments, if unchecked, endanger freedom, 
liberals were inclined to think in terms of the least bad form of 
government rather than the best form. 

Hayek follows the liberal tradition in these respects. He 


92 


MAJORITY RULE AND LIMITED GOVERNMENT 


classifies governments mainly according to whether they are 
limited or arbitrary, so the form of rule becomes a secondary 
consideration: ‘It is not who governs but what government is 
entitled to do that seems to me to be the essential problem’ (403). 
By limited government, Hayek understands one in which the use 
of coercive power is constrained by general rules that are well 
established and effective. By arbitrary government, he under- 
stands political rule that is not constrained by law. Arbitrary 
government, in all of its forms, endangers liberty. 


Democracy versus elite rule 

Insofar as the various forms of rule are concerned, Hayek distin- 
guishes mainly between government by the few, or elite rule, and 
government by the many, or majority rule. He subsumes both 
alternatives - elite rule and majority rule - under his primary 
distinction between ‘limited’ and ‘arbitrary.’ This means that 
there can be limited governments of either an elite or a demo- 
cratic form. Alternatively there can be arbitrary governments of 
either form. Thus, for example, elite rule can be a limited govern- 
ment, while democratic rule can be of the arbitrary type. The key 
question is whether the ruling body subordinates itself to the law. 

The desirability of elite rule obviously depends on the quali- 
ties of this select group. In line with the liberal tradition, Hayek 
rejects claims to power based merely on an advantageous birth or 
on superior wealth. The only kind of elite rule worthy of consid- 
eration is that of ‘the wisest and best informed.’ Hayek grants the 
possibility that ‘in any given state of affairs, government by some 
educated elite would be a more efficient and perhaps even more 
just government than one chosen by majority vote’ (108). Even 


93 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


so, he concludes that ‘democracy is probably the best form of 
limited government’ or, stated more cautiously, that majority rule 
is perhaps ‘the least evil of those forms of government from which 
we have to choose’ (116, 403). 

Hayek identifies ‘three chief arguments by which democ- 
racy can be justified, each of which may be regarded as conclu- 
sive.’ First, counting numbers is less wasteful than fighting in 
determining which among conflicting opinions has the stronger 
support: ‘Democracy is the only method of peaceful change that 
man has yet discovered.’ A second argument - very important 
historically though perhaps not always valid now - is that ‘the 
prospects of individual liberty are better in a democracy than 
under other forms of government.’ This is because democracy 
fosters certain qualities, such as courage and industry, which 
inspire and safeguard individual liberty. Also, ‘since coercive 
power must in fact always be exercised by a few,’ its abuse is less 
likely if it can be revoked by the many who must submit to it. 
A third argument - in Hayek’s view the most powerful one - is 
that democratic institutions improve ‘the general level of under- 
standing of public affairs.’ What Hayek has chiefly in mind here 
is the way majority opinion is formed through debate among 
contending views. Democratic opinion is not static, but grows 
out of a dynamic process that favours the progress of knowledge. 
Hayek can thus agree with Tocqueville that ‘democracy is the only 
effective method of educating the majority.’ Also, when know- 
ledge is diffused broadly, a wide range of persons is available from 
which to select those who will govern (107-9). 


94 


MAJORITY RULE AND LIMITED GOVERNMENT 


Democracy is a procedure only 

Limiting the popular majority is a pressing concern for Hayek; 
and his solution is tied up with his insistence that democracy 
is only a method or procedure for reaching decisions, with no 
fixed aims of its own. As we have seen, Hayek regards majority 
rule as the safest and most successful way for the community to 
reach important decisions, and he defends democracy on this 
basis alone. Democracy is a means and not an end in itself. It is 
a method or procedure for deciding on common ends, but it has 
no ends of its own (106; cf. 109). Democracy as such ‘indicates 
nothing about the aims of government’ (104). This means that 
liberals and democrats are both wrong in connecting democracy 
to a substantive end: i.e. to freedom or to equality. 

What Hayek says about majority rule in the community 
must be seen in this light. Hayek requires that majority rule be 
consistent with the community’s common beliefs or principles, 
but initially at least he leaves open the content of those beliefs or 
principles. From this standpoint, it would seem that democracy is 
consistent with fascism or with what J. L. T almon has called ‘total- 
itarian democracy’ (56), if this is what the community believes in. 
Certainly it is consistent with socialism: ‘when the opinion of the 
community decides what different people shall receive, the same 
authority must also decide what they shall do’ (232). 

Detaching democracy from fixed ends or principles opens 
the door to oppression; and Hayek offers two ways around this 
problem. One solution is to require that majority decisions take 
the form of general rules: ‘So long as democracy constrains the 
individual only by general rules of its own making, it controls 
the power of coercion’ (116). It is dangerous for democracy to go 
beyond this and specify ends to be achieved, since this will extend 


95 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


the discretionary power of the administrators. Thus the individual 
‘has little reason to fear any general laws which the majority 
may pass, but he has much reason to fear the rulers it may put 
over him to implement its direction’ (116). Under this solution, 
constraining government by general rules or laws is sufficient to 
protect freedom, regardless of the opinions or beliefs that are held 
by the community and voiced by the majority. 

Hayek does, however, offer an alternative solution, which is to 
instil beliefs or opinions that are favourable to liberty. One may 
profoundly respect the convention that the majority view should 
prevail in collective action, ‘but this does not in the least mean 
that one should not make every effort to alter it’ (109). Hayek 
follows this with a very long discussion (considered earlier) of how 
opinion comes to be formed in democratic communities and espe- 
cially how the ideas of theorists or political philosophers influence 
public opinion in the long run. Making democracy safe for liberty 
is primarily an educational task: ‘democracy has yet to learn that, 
in order to be just, it must be guided in its action by general prin- 
ciples’ (314). Hayek undertakes to supply these principles through 
his teaching on the Rule of Law and limited government. The 
Constitution of Liberty is an educational enterprise, designed to 
shape belief and opinion in a democratic age. 

Hayek is much more favourable to democracy in The Constitu- 
tion of Liberty than in Law, Legislation and Liberty. In the former, he 
attributes democracy’s excesses mostly to a lack of understanding, 
the solution to which is education or enlightenment. Later Hayek 
came to believe that democracy had devolved into unlimited or 
arbitrary government and had become something of a game in 
which government tries to maintain a majority coalition by ‘satis- 
fying the demands of a multitude of special interests’ (1979: 99; cf. 


96 


MAJORITY RULE AND LIMITED GOVERNMENT 


98-104). This leads him to develop institutional means of limiting 
majority rule, which he incorporates into a model constitution 
(ibid.: 105-27). 


97 


PART II 

FREEDOM AND THE LAW 


99 


6 THE RULE OF LAW AND ITS 

DETRACTORS (CHAPTERS 14 AND 16) 


Hayek’s primary aim in The Constitution of Liberty is to explain 
the meaning and practical significance of the Rule of Law. Part II, 
where this ideal is portrayed, is the book’s centre, both literally 
and substantively. 

Hayek had often spoken of the Rule of Law in earlier writings 
(see 1944b [2007b]: 112-23), but his fullest account, prior to The 
Constitution of Liberty, appears in a set of four lectures, delivered 
in 1955 at the invitation of the Bank of Egypt, entitled The Political 
Ldeal of the Rule of Law (1955). Later, Hayek explains that while en 
route to Egypt, he and his wife spent several months in Europe, 
retracing a journey that J. S. Mill had once made to Italy and 
Greece. The trip rekindled Hayek’s interest in Mill’s On Liberty 
and its case for freedom. The Cairo Lectures, together with his 
‘constant preoccupation with Mill’s thinking,’ brought it about 
that after Hayek returned to Chicago in the autumn of 1955, ‘the 
plan for The Constitution of Liberty suddenly stood clearly before 
my mind ... I had before me a clear plan for a book on liberty 
arranged round the Cairo lectures’ (1994: 129-30). In this light, we 
see that Part I of The Constitution of Liberty takes up questions of 
individual freedom that Mill wrestled with, but failed to resolve 
satisfactorily. Part II restates and expands the Cairo Lectures. Part 
III applies the Rule of Law to issues of government policy. Hayek 
drew heavily from the Cairo Lectures in preparing The Constitution 


101 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


of Liberty, and taking them into account will be helpful in under- 
standing his later exposition. 


Importance of the ideal 

Deciding what Hayek means by the Rule of Law is a more complex 
problem than might first appear. ‘Rule’ here is not to be under- 
stood as an activity. Hayek does not mean that the law rules, in 
the sense of exerting authority over a political community. He is 
thinking instead of ‘rule’ as a precept or, more accurately, as an 
ideal. The Rule of Law depicts what the law should be in a free 
society. It is a definitive principle or ideal - the ideal of freedom 
under the law - that stands above and measures the laws of a 
community. Existing laws, including constitutional provisions 
as well as ordinary legislation, may approach this ideal, but can 
never embody it perfectly. 

Hayek says this about the importance of having an ideal of 
liberty: 

Not only is liberty a system under which all government 
action is guided by principles, but it is an ideal that will 
not be preserved unless it is itself accepted as an overriding 
principle governing all particular acts of legislation. Where 
no such fundamental rule is stubbornly adhered to as an 
ultimate ideal about which there must be no compromise 
for the sake of material advantages - as an ideal which, even 
though it may have to be temporarily infringed during a 
passing emergency, must form the basis of all permanent 
arrangements - freedom is almost certain to be destroyed 
by piecemeal encroachments. (68) 


The ideal of the Rule of Law is designed to preserve a system 


102 


THE RULE OF LAW AND ITS DETRACTORS 


of liberty. What remains uncertain, however, is how an ideal as 
such, as distinct from some particular ideal, is to be understood. 
What is its cognitive status? Is it grounded in what we can know 
or experience of reality? 


A meta-legal principle 

In the Cairo Lectures, Hayek describes the Rule of Law as ‘an 
extra-legal rule’ or ‘a Meta-Legal principle’ (1955: 26, 32-3). Hayek 
opens Chapter 14 of The Constitution of Liberty with a section 
entitled ‘The rule of law [as] a meta-legal doctrine,’ and here he 
quotes the third lecture almost verbatim: 

The rule of law is ... not a rule of the law, but a rule 
concerning what the law ought to be, a meta-legal doctrine 
or a political ideal. It will be effective only so far as the 
legislator feels bound by it. In a democracy this means 
that it will not prevail unless it forms part of the moral 
tradition of the community, a common ideal shared and 
unquestioningly accepted by the majority. (206) 

Hayek intends to draw a sharp line between laws and the Rule 
of Law: ‘From the fact that the rule of law is a limitation upon 
all legislation, it follows that it cannot itself be a law in the same 
sense as the laws passed by the legislator’ (205). Systems of laws 
or rules are products of the evolutionary process, where man 
interacts constantly with his environment. The Rule of Law as an 
ideal or meta-legal principle, while derivative from this process, 
somehow stands above it as a constant or universal. It provides a 
standard to which the laws should conform, if they are to remain 
within bounds. The ideal’s political effectiveness will depend on 
whether a community believes in it, and this depends in turn 


103 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


on that community’s moral traditions; but the ideal itself is not 
reducible to the opinions of a particular community. 

Hayek is dealing here with the problem of transcendence, 
and he had several alternative ways to address it. First, he might 
have presented the Rule of Law as a ‘higher law’ or natural law, 
something timeless that we discover by reasoning on the nature of 
things. Hayek’s Rule of Law can be seen as an up-to-date version 
of the higher law doctrine, but he rejects natural law. The idea of 
a constant nature with moral meaning is ruled out by his absorp- 
tion of reason into civilisation or his understanding of being 
as process. The Rule of Law does function like the older law of 
nature, standing above and limiting government; but unlike 
natural law, it is neutral as regards the ends of human action. 

A second alternative was made available by post-Hegelian 
German historicism. Historicism ‘was a school that claimed to 
recognize necessary laws of historical development and to be able 
to derive from such insight knowledge of what institutions were 
appropriate to the existing situation.’ It assumed that the mind, 
by transcending limitations of time and place, can ‘explicitly 
recognize how our present views are determined by circumstances 
and use this knowledge to remake our institutions in a manner 
appropriate to our time.’ Hayek objects to historicism on two 
grounds: it leads to an ‘extreme relativism,’ inasmuch as it posits a 
separate ideal for each epoch and not a universal ideal for civilisa- 
tion; and it is ‘constructivist,’ since it rejects ‘all rules that cannot 
be rationally justified or have not been deliberately designed to 
achieve a specific purpose’ (235-6). 

A third alternative was laid out by Max Weber. Weber 
rejected the historicist claim that there are discoverable laws of 
history, holding instead that the social scientist is confronted with 


104 


THE RULE OF LAW AND ITS DETRACTORS 


boundless facts of experience, from which he must select those 
that will give focus to his research. This selection is achieved by 
constructing ‘ideal types,’ which are very different from ideals of a 
moral or aesthetic character. Ideal types, such as ‘capitalism,’ are 
indispensable to social science. While they are designed to study 
people’s values, they rigorously avoid any value judgements of 
their own or any claim as to what ought to be. Moral and aesthetic 
ideals have no place in social science, since they have no rational 
or empirical basis whatever. A scholar may decide to become the 
advocate for an ideal, but in doing so he leaves science behind and 
enters the ceaseless conflict that ‘rages between different gods.’ 
Weber’s ‘war of the gods’ is his characterisation of the conflict 
between ideals. The choice among them is ultimately a matter of 
faith or the individual’s subjective decision (Weber, 2004: 17-31; 
Weber, 1949: 17-19, 22-6, 50-59, 89-101). 

Hayek greatly admired Weber, especially for denying that 
history exhibits discoverable laws and for advocating methodolog- 
ical individualism in social inquiry. He could not, however, accept 
Weber’s conclusion, with its deep Nietzschean overtones, that 
ideals lack a foundation, that there is no rational basis forjudging 
one to be superior to another, and that the decision among them 
is ultimately an arbitrary one, based on an act of faith or sheer 
will - like choosing between God and the Devil. To be sure, the 
political philosopher, by Hayek’s reckoning, must not be ‘afraid 
of deciding between conflicting values.’ He recognises ‘that he 
must choose which he should accept and which reject’ (114-15). 
Nevertheless, Hayek looks for some foundation for this choice and 
refuses to see it as only a matter of faith or subjective will. 

Hayek’s alternative is to put forward his ideal, the Rule of 
Law, as a meta-legal principle. He does not tell us much about the 


105 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


status of this principle, but clearly it must be understood in light 
of his foundational teachings in Part I. Hayek has emphasised that 
‘we can never synthetically construct a new body of moral rules’ 
(63). We must accept much of ‘the undirected and spontane- 
ously grown’ (69). Human civilisation ‘has a life of its own,’ and 
‘all our efforts to improve things must operate within a working 
whole which we cannot entirely control.’ Hayek’s ideal or meta- 
legal principle must be viewed in these terms: its purpose is not 
to construct a new body of moral rules, but to identify those rules 
that have favoured the progress of civilisation; and in this respect 
it has a foundation or ground. 

Progress is favoured chiefly by freedom. Progress cannot be 
designed, and its direction cannot be anticipated. Our best hope 
of improving things is to protect individual freedom. The Rule of 
Law is strictly about freedom. It says nothing about the ends that 
individuals should pursue or about the long-term consequences of 
human action. 

According to Hayek, the evolutionary process selects out 
moral rules that favour a society’s survival or flourishing. In the 
second Cairo Lecture, he portrays the ideal of the Rule of Law, as it 
developed in nineteenth-century Germany, in such terms: 

Like most of the governing ideas of any age, it was held 
not because its rationale was fully understood, but rather 
because the success of the groups and civilizations who had 
held it had brought it [the Rule of Law] to dominance. It 
had become part of that sense of justice which a process of 
natural selection among societies produces by making those 
flourish which have evolved beliefs most conductive to the 
best use of the capacities of their members. (1955: 26) 

The point to be underscored is this: with hindsight we 


106 


THE RULE OF LAW AND ITS DETRACTORS 


recognise that adherence to the Rule of Law has promoted such 
social ends as survival, success or flourishing; but since the future 
is open and uncertain, Hayek seldom justifies his ideal in terms of 
its likely consequences. The Rule of Law is strictly about freedom. 
It is constructed from evolved moral rules that safeguard liberty. 
Its aim is to protect individual freedom here and now and to open 
up the possibility of human development. 

The Rule of Law is an outgrowth of Western civilisation, but 
Hayek puts it forward as a universal ideal and not one just for 
Western nations. He provides no clear explanation as to how a 
particular ideal becomes a standard for all, but he does suggest 
two possibilities: the Rule of Law offers a pattern for nations 
that aspire to match the creative achievements of the West; or 
since modernity has produced a universal civilisation, shaped by 
Western ideas and institutions, the West’s guiding ideal is now 
the standard for civilisation as such. 


Detractors of the Rule of Law 

Chapter 16 examines ‘The Decline of the Law.’ This decline began 
in Germany soon after institutions designed to secure the Rule 
of Law were completed. Political and theoretical views emerged 
that strongly opposed limiting authority by rules of law. They 
sought ‘to give the organized forces of government greater power 
to shape social relations deliberately according to some ideal of 
social justice’ (235). Opinion soon turned against free institutions, 
making them incapable of serving their intended aims. 

Chapter 16 is mostly about legal theories that rejected or 
redefined the Rule of Law. They originated in Germany, but soon 
came to have wide influence in other Western countries, such as 


107 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


Russia, the UK and the USA. We need only consider what Hayek 
says about legal positivism. 

Legal positivism developed in direct opposition to the natural 
law tradition. Hayek, of course, has his own objections to natural 
law theory, but shares its view that a community’s laws must 
be measured by a higher standard - one that is ‘found’ and not 
simply created or willed. For legal positivism, ‘law by definition 
consists exclusively of deliberate commands of a human will;’ and 
no higher standard exists by which to measure these commands. 
The implication is that there can be no limits to the legislator’s 
will. Such rules as the state authority enacts must be accepted 
as legal, so that the distinction between ‘legal’ enactments and 
‘illegal’ ones ceases to be valid. 

Legal positivism came to be widely accepted after World 
War I. Its most consistent and influential formulation is to be 
found in Hans Kelsen’s ‘pure theory of law.’ Kelsen embraced and 
articulated legal positivism’s far-reaching implications: what the 
legislator wills or commands is law; this will is unlimited; there are 
no fundamental liberties that the legislator is bound to respect; 
and a despotic state can have the character of a legal order. By the 
end of the 1920s, legal positivism had conquered German opinion 
and was ‘spreading rapidly to the rest of the world,’ helping to 
justify the rise of despotism in Hitler’s Germany, Fascist Italy and 
Soviet Russia (238-9; 1955: 22). 

From the outset legal positivism opposed ‘those meta-legal 
principles which underlie the ideal of the rule of law’ - principles 
that it dismissed as ‘metaphysical superstition.’ More fundamen- 
tally, it redefined the concept, so that any state ‘whose whole 
activity takes place on the basis of laws and in legal form’ is in 
conformity with the Rule of Law (238). The Rule of Law came to 


108 


THE RULE OF LAW AND ITS DETRACTORS 


mean nothing more than ‘the demand for legality, the require- 
ment of a legal foundation for any act of the state.’ It thereby 
‘ceased to have any significance as a guarantee of individual 
freedom, since any oppression, however arbitrary or discrimina- 
tory, could be legalized by a law authorizing an authority to act 
in such a manner’ (1955: 27). Hayek does detect some signs of a 
reaction against legal positivism and similar doctrines (247-9), 
but there remains an urgent need to clarify and restore the Rule 
of Law. 


109 


7 ORIGINS AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE 
RULE OF LAW (CHAPTERS 11, 12, 13) 


Hayek devotes three chapters to the origins of the Rule of 
Law and to its institutional and conceptual development. These 
chapters focus in turn on England during the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries, on America during its founding period, 
and on Germany between 1800 and the 1870s. Hayek ’s emphasis 
throughout is on the growth of institutions that embody aspects 
of the Rule of Law and on ideas that convey its basic principles. 
This fits with his intention to show that the Rule of Law, as an 
ideal, is not simply a rational construction, but the result of an 
evolutionary process, where emerging beliefs and unintended 
consequences made possible an articulation of the principles of 
individual freedom. The contributions of England, America and 
Germany are presented as parts of a single process of growth or 
as ‘stages in a continuous development’ (202). Each nation added 
something distinctive during its shining moment. There is no 
chapter on France, since Hayek judges that political and intellec- 
tual developments there, after the Revolution, were largely unfa- 
vourable to his ideal (194-6). 


110 


English origins 

When and where did individual freedom originate? Contrary to 
some interpretations, Hayek insists that such freedom was known 


ORIGINS AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE RULE OF LAW 


to the ancients, particularly in Athens at the time of its greatness 
and in late republican Rome. In fact, what classical authors said 
about individual freedom and its legal protections would greatly 
influence modern thought (164-7). Hayek’s interest, however, is 
not in the ancient world, but in the modern origins of individual 
freedom, understood both as the general condition of a people 
and as an ideal. 

The modern evolution of the Rule of Law began in seven- 
teenth-century England. This evolution, as traced by Hayek, 
involves both events and ideas, with events and their unforeseen 
consequences taking priority. Thus he observes that English 
liberty ‘appeared first, as it probably always does, as a by-product 
of a struggle for power rather than as the result of deliberate aim’ 
(162). Hayek refers here to the great struggle between king and 
Parliament that began soon after Elizabeth’s death in 1603 and 
convulsed seventeenth-century England; the liberty of the indi- 
vidual ‘emerged [from it] as a by-product’ (167). The conflict 
with Parliament was provoked by the economic policies of Eliza- 
beth’s successors, particularly their attempts to establish indus- 
trial monopolies and to impose severe regulations on economic 
activity. These policies led to demands for ‘equal laws for all 
citizens’ and for adherence to ‘the certain rule of law,’ as distin- 
guished from uncertain and arbitrary government. Ways to limit 
royal discretion and bring the king under the law were discussed 
extensively and continuously throughout the Civil War. From 
this discussion there gradually emerged all the political ideals 
‘which were thenceforth to govern English political evolution’ 
(168). 

The evolutionary process that Hayek is describing was highly 
compressed. By 1660, when the Stuart monarchy was restored, 


111 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


the ideas of liberty advanced in preceding decades ‘had become 
part of an established tradition.’ Hayek’s account of seventeenth- 
century England details a massive and rapid shift in opinion 
regarding the kind of government that could legitimately claim 
the people’s obedience. This is significant, because ‘power is 
ultimately not a physical fact but a state of opinion which makes 
people obey’ (181). Hayek further observes that ‘a group of men 
can form a society capable of making laws because they already 
share common beliefs which make discussion and persuasion 
possible and to which the articulated rules must conform in 
order to be accepted as legitimate’ (181). The prevalence of such 
common beliefs explains how Parliament, in the Glorious Revo- 
lution of 1688, could with little bloodshed depose the ruling 
monarch and install a new one. The emergent ideas of liberty 
subsequently became part of the doctrine of the victorious Whig 
party. John Locke’s major achievement was to codify Whig 
doctrine, thereby setting forth the practical principles that should, 
by common agreement, thereafter control government’s powers 
(169-71). While Hayek is largely critical of Locke’s speculations on 
the foundations of government, he applauds his ‘codification’ of 
the accepted political doctrine. 

The first half of the eighteenth century was the main period 
of consolidation, during which time the ideal of the Rule of Law 
‘progressively penetrated everyday practice.’ Most of the prin- 
ciples for which Englishmen of the previous century had fought 
were slowly but steadily extended. Indeed, ‘the principles them- 
selves ceased to be a matter of [partisan] dispute;’ and the Tories 
came fully to accept them (171-2). Later in the century, ‘coherent 
expositions’ of English ideals were put forward, chiefly by Hume, 
Burke and William Paley. Other leading writers, including Adam 


112 


ORIGINS AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE RULE OF LAW 


Smith and William Blackstone, took these ideals for granted, but 
largely refrained from stating them explicitly (172-4). 

England’s major contribution to the evolution of the prin- 
ciples of freedom ended with the close of the eighteenth century. 
Its achievements were mostly preserved beyond the nineteenth 
century, but there was little further development of underlying 
ideals, even in the writings of historians such as T. B. Macaulay 
and of economists in the Smithian tradition. There emerged a 
new, constructivist liberalism, often guided by the ideals of the 
Erench Revolution, which scorned Britain’s received constitution 
and proposed ‘to remake the whole of her law and institutions on 
rational principles.’ Here Hayek mentions Bentham and the Utili- 
tarians as well as the moralist and radical pamphleteer Richard 
Price. From this point forward the English ideal of individual 
liberty was progressively displaced, even in Great Britain, by ‘the 
essentially French concept of political liberty’ (174-5). 


America's contribution 

The colonists who settled America brought with them the prin- 
ciples of individual freedom that had developed in England, 
including ‘the conception that no power should be arbitrary and 
that all power should be limited by higher law’ (177). What Amer- 
icans added was an insistence on a fixed constitution, a written 
document that recognises fundamental principles and organises 
government around them. This conviction - that the protec- 
tion of freedom requires a written constitution - was rooted in 
America’s early experience with compacts and charters. It found 
expression in the various state constitutions that were established 
during and after the Revolution, and it stimulated efforts to draft 


113 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


a constitution for the USA. Hayek calls this belief and practice 
‘constitutionalism;’ and he regards constitutionalism as America’s 
distinctive contribution to the growth of the Rule of Law. 

American constitutionalism presents something of a challenge 
to Hayek’s outlook. The federal Constitution, like the various state 
constitutions that were formed after the Revolution, arose from 
an effort deliberately to construct a basic framework of laws and 
also to achieve something unprecedented in the annals of govern- 
ment. In this respect it can be viewed as both constructivist and 
anti-traditional. Hayek acknowledges that the American founders 
were, in a sense, ‘guided by a spirit of rationalism, a desire for 
deliberate construction and pragmatic procedure closer to what 
we have called the “French tradition” than to the “British.”’ 
Furthermore, they exhibited ‘a general suspicion of tradition and 
an exuberant pride in the fact that the new structure was entirely 
of their own making.’ 

Hayek insists, however, that the American founders were 
‘essentially mistaken’ as to what they were achieving. The govern- 
mental framework that ultimately emerged from the federal 
Constitution was different ‘from any clearly foreseen structure,’ 
and ‘much of the outcome was due to historical accident or 
the application of inherited principles to a new situation.’ The 
vaunted ‘new discoveries’ of the Constitution either ‘resulted from 
the application of traditional principles to particular problems’ 
or else ‘emerged as only dimly perceived consequences of general 
ideas’ (183-4). 

American constitutionalism, besides requiring a fixed and 
written document, incorporated numerous ways of limiting govern- 
ment and making it conform to general rules. In this connection 
Hayek discusses the appeal to higher law, the division of powers 


114 


ORIGINS AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE RULE OF LAW 


both among the branches of the federal government and between 
government and the states, the insistence on the inviolable rights 
of individuals, and the practice ofjudicial review. A thread running 
through the entire discussion is the problem of how, in popular 
government, majorities can be kept within safe limits. 

The Americans were much more concerned than the English 
had been with limiting the power of representative legislatures. 
Partly this was because the colonists, in the decade leading up to 
the Revolution, had been forced to resist Parliament’s claim to 
power over them; but more fundamentally it reflected awareness 
that, in a democratic society, majority rule could endanger liberty. 
The newly formed state legislatures were frequently criticised at 
the time for exceeding their proper powers. 

Americans embraced the long-standing view that ordinary 
legislation must conform to a ‘higher law;’ and they insisted on 
codifying higher law principles in a written document, so as to 
make them explicit and enforceable. This means that particular 
laws enacted by the legislature are just only if they conform to 
principles embodied in the Constitution. Requiring conformity to 
general principles deters the legislature from sacrificing long-term 
advantages to immediate aims and from conferring privileges or 
imposing penalties on individuals (179-80). 

Hayek’s view of higher law differs substantially from the way 
the Americans themselves understood it. By his interpretation, 
higher law is not rooted in divine will, or nature, or reason, as 
Americans had generally believed. Hayek reminds us that reason 
always ‘moves within a non-rational framework of beliefs and 
institutions.’ Higher law, for any society, consists of principles 
implicit in prevailing beliefs and opinions. The decisive considera- 
tion is whether a people, regardless of how they understand the 


115 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


source of higher principles, resolves to follow them long-term. By 
doing so, a people gains ‘more control over the general nature of 
the political order than they would possess if its character were to 
be determined solely by successive decisions of a particular char- 
acter’ (181-2). 

American constitutionalism was centrally concerned with 
limiting representative legislatures. To this end, the federal 
Constitution divided power among three branches of govern- 
ment, enumerated legislative powers, and opened the door for 
the judiciary to invalidate laws that conflict with the Constitution. 
Hayek is silent about some crucial checks on the US Congress - 
its division into two ‘Houses’ which must agree with each other to 
enact laws, and the presidential veto. 

As for the executive, Hayek is critical of constitutional provi- 
sions that ‘led to the formation of a presidential republic.’ Under 
this arrangement, ‘the chief executive derives his power directly 
from the people and, in consequence, may belong to a different 
party from that which controls the legislature.’ Hayek objects that 
this arrangement erects an ‘obstacle to the efficiency of the execu- 
tive;’ but later he suggests a deeper reason for avoiding a presi- 
dential republic - the prospect that the executive, in the name 
of the people, will undertake measures that endanger freedom. 
Thus Franklin D. Roosevelt, convinced that he knew best how to 
deal with the Great Depression, ‘conceived it as the function of 
democracy in times of crisis to give unlimited powers to the man 
it trusted.’ Among other measures, Roosevelt attempted in 1937 
to gain control of the Supreme Court by increasing its size and 
packing it with judges who supported his policies. This effort was 
defeated in the US Senate - a case where the legislature acted to 
curb unwarranted executive power (186, 190-91). 


116 


ORIGINS AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE RULE OF LAW 


The issue of majority rule is central to Hayek’s discussion of 
American constitutionalism. Mainly he relies on a distinction that 
the American founders had employed, one between the majority’s 
often ill-considered short-term will and its more deliberate long- 
term will. The Constitution’s democratically minded critics fault 
it for structuring government so as to thwart the majority will. 
Hayek replies that ‘a constitutional system does not involve an 
absolute limitation of the will of the people but merely a subordi- 
nation of immediate objectives to long-term ones.’ Thus the people 
agree ‘to submit to the will of the temporary majority on particular 
issues’ on ‘the understanding that this majority will abide by more 
general principles laid down beforehand by a more comprehensive 
body,’ such as a constitutional convention (179-80). 


Culmination in Germany 

Each of the nations that contributed to the growth of the Rule 
of Law responded to a particular threat to individual freedom: 
England to arbitrary monarchical power; America to representa- 
tive legislatures and majorities fixed on short-term goals; and 
Germany to the administrative state. 

The ‘German people’ had a complex political history during 
the period of Hayek’s review, and it is sometimes difficult to tell 
just which phase of that history or which German states he has in 
mind. The German Confederation was formed in 1815, following 
the defeats of Napoleon. It was comprised of 39 states, with 
Prussia and Austria being the dominant members. In 1866, with 
the victory of Prussia and its German allies in the Austro-Prussian 
War, the German Confederation was dissolved; and that year the 
North German Confederation was established by Prussia and 


117 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


north German states. Prussia’s growing dominance and its 1870 
victory in the Franco-Prussian War led to the formation in 1871 
of the German Empire as a constitutional monarchy, with King 
Wilhelm of Prussia as German Emperor and Otto von Bismarck 
as Chancellor. 

Elayek gives a mixed verdict on Prussian influence. Looking 
back to the eighteenth century, he credits Frederick II’s civil code 
of 1751 with initiating a rapidly spreading movement ‘for the codi- 
fication of all the laws.’ Hayek regards this movement ‘as one of 
the most important aspects of the endeavor on the Continent to 
establish the rule of law’ (197). In this atmosphere Immanuel Kant 
and later the young Wilhelm von Humboldt wrote highly influen- 
tial treatises on moral and educational freedom; and liberal move- 
ments emerged with the broad aim of limiting government by a 
constitution and general laws. Yet by the 1860s and 1870s, Prussia 
had become a ‘police state,’ defeating efforts to bring Prussia itself 
and the broader political entities it dominated under the Rule of 
Law (199-200). 

The liberal movement in Germany had two main goals: estab- 
lishing the Rechtsstaat (or law state) and achieving the ideal of 
constitutionalism. In the Cairo Lectures, Hayek gives considerable 
attention to writers, especially in southern Germany, who helped 
develop the theoretical conception of the Rechtsstaat after 1800; 
but he omits this review in Chapter 13 of The Constitution of Liberty 
(cf. 1955: 21-3). 

The Rechtsstaat was designed primarily to curb the arbi- 
trary exercise of power by the expanding bureaucracy. In all of 
continental Europe, and especially in Prussia, there developed ‘a 
powerful centralized administrative machinery’ with ‘a body of 
professional administrators who had become the main rulers of 


118 


ORIGINS AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE RULE OF LAW 


the people’ (193). Initially liberals saw their choice as one between 
either depending on the ordinary courts to decide whether admin- 
istrative acts were lawful and consistent with private rights or, 
in line with French practice, establishing ‘quasi-judicial bodies 
inside the administrative machinery’ to decide on the lawfulness 
of administrative acts (196, 199-201). For a long time the liberal 
supporters of the Rechtsstaat advocated the first approach, which 
would depend on the ordinary courts to limit the administration. 
This approach came to be known as ‘justicialism.’ By the 1860s 
liberals had turned to a different conception, which in effect 
modified the first approach so as to avoid placing judicial respon- 
sibility inside the administration. 

Rudolf von Gneist was the main architect of the new system. 
Von Gneist and his supporters called for the creation of a 
separate system of courts, alongside the regular ones, to hear 
cases involving administrative actions. These ‘were meant to be 
completely independent courts,’ not judicial bodies inside the 
administrative apparatus; and it was hoped that they would, 
in the course of time, ‘assume a strictly judicial control over all 
administrative action.’ To defend these special courts, advocates 
reasoned that ‘the ordinary judge, trained mainly in private 
or criminal law,’ cannot be expected to possess the specialised 
knowledge required to settle disputes over administrative actions. 
This argument won over liberal supporters of the Rule of Law. 
Thereafter the Rechtsstaat came to mean a system of independent 
administrative courts rather than a reliance on the ordinary 
courts. Indeed, this new approach was seen as the Rechtsstaat’ s 
crowning achievement. Most German administrative lawyers 
backed it; and a system along these lines was introduced in the 
German states in the 1860s and 1870s (200-202). 


119 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


Liberal hopes of imposing independent judicial control over 
an entrenched bureaucracy would be disappointed: ‘Just as the 
new device was introduced, there commenced a major reversal of 
intellectual trends’ - a reversal that was occasioned by the ‘new 
movement toward state socialism and the welfare state.’ This new 
movement began to gather force in the 1870s and 1880s, just as 
the system of administrative courts received its final shape in the 
German states. The new movement favoured widening admin- 
istrative discretion rather than confining it by judicial review. 
Consequently the liberal conception of the Rule of Law, whose 
centrepiece had been the Rechtsstaat, was abandoned as a prac- 
tical measure. The Germans were thus ‘the last people that the 
liberal tide reached before it began to recede’ (202). 

Hayek warns us not to underrate the theoretical achievement 
of German liberals. Despite their lack of political success, they 
were the ones who applied the old ideal of the Rule of Law to the 
problem of restraining the modern administrative state: ‘they 
represent in some respects the last stage in a continuous develop- 
ment and are perhaps better adapted to the problems of our time 
than many of the older institutions.’ The rise of the administrative 
state began in continental Europe; but in the twentieth century, 
it ascended in Britain and the USA as well. Thus the ‘power of 
the professional administrator ... is now the main threat to indi- 
vidual liberty;’ and the ‘institutions developed in Germany for the 
purpose of keeping him in check deserve more careful examina- 
tion than they have been given’ (202). 

In this context Hayek criticises A. V. Dicey, whose study of 
the English constitution he generally praises, for making ‘the 
possibility of a review of administrative acts by the ordinary 
courts’ the chief test of the Rule of Law. Dicey here overlooked 


120 


ORIGINS AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE RULE OF LAW 


the independent administrative courts that were central to the 
idea and practice of the Rechtsstaat. In this way Dicey contributed 
much ‘to prevent or delay the growth of institutions which could 
subject the new bureaucratic machinery to effective control.’ His 
influence ‘blocked the development which would have offered the 
best chance of preserving’ the Rule of Law (203-4). 


121 


8 REQUIREMENTS OF THE RULE OF LAW 
(CHAPTER 14) 


The Rule of Law defines the attributes of ‘true law’ and also 
identifies the institutions that are required to safeguard indi- 
vidual liberty. Hayek enumerates these attributes and safeguards 
in both the Cairo Lectures and The Constitution of Liberty (Chapter 
14), but with some important variations. This enumeration is 
not presented as a rational system, but rather as ‘a complex of 
doctrines which have been formulated at different times and 
which are connected only by serving the same end’ (1955: 34). This 
view fits Hayek’s claim that his ‘ideal’ is a product of undirected 
growth rather than logical construction. 


True law promotes freedom by safeguarding the private 
sphere 

The end served by the Rule of Law, broadly stated, is to promote 
liberty by making individuals secure against governmental 
encroachments on the private sphere. More specifically, it ‘is to 
limit coercion by the power of the state to instances where it is 
explicitly required by general abstract rules which have been 
announced beforehand and which [are] applied equally to all 
people, and refer to circumstances known to them’ (ibid.: 34; cf. 
i960: 208). Government coerces individuals chiefly by punishing 
them. Under the Rule of Law, it can ‘infringe a person’s protected 


122 


REQUIREMENTS OF THE RULE OF LAW 


private sphere only as punishment for breaking an announced 
general rule’ (206). Here and elsewhere, Hayek distinguishes 
sharply between general laws that the ordinary citizen must 
observe and those acts of legislative authority, which amount to 
orders, that instruct servants of the state ‘concerning the manner 
in which they are to direct the apparatus of government and the 
means which are at their disposal’ (207). Government has broad 
discretion to command how its particular resources will be used, 
but it cannot order about the private individual as if he were a 
mere governmental resource. 


True law is known and certain 

The laws must be made known or promulgated, since they shape 
the environment in which we plan our actions. If individuals 
know what rules they can count on, they are better able to predict 
the outcome of their actions, determine their responsibilities, and 
use their knowledge effectively. Known and certain laws are vital 
to economic life; and they promote the spontaneous growth of 
social order. They enable people to ‘foresee with a high degree of 
confidence what collaboration they can expect from others,’ thus 
facilitating the ‘mutual adjustment of individuals’ that produces 
order spontaneously. Hayek emphasises that the law’s relative 
certainty makes court decisions predictable, thus reducing litiga- 
tion and enabling a free society to run more smoothly and effi- 
ciently. These considerations lead him to conclude that ‘the task 
of the lawgiver is not to set up a particular order but merely to 
create conditions in which an orderly arrangement can establish 
and ever renew itself (208-9; cf. 159-61). 


123 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


True law is both general and equal 

Generality or abstractness is a necessary feature of law. Hayek 
had made this clear particularly by distinguishing in Chapter to 
between laws and commands. A command is an order to someone 
to take a particular action or refrain from it; and it presupposes 
someone who has issued the command. A law, by contrast, ‘is 
directed to unknown people,’ and it speaks in an impersonal 
voice. It abstracts ‘from all particular circumstances of time and 
place’ and ‘refers only to such conditions as may occur anywhere 
and at any time.’ Hayek grants that these distinctions are not 
hard and fast, since laws ‘shade gradually into commands as their 
content becomes more specific’ (149-50). 

The principle of generality does not, however, encompass 
the requirement that ‘any law should apply equally to all.’ A law 
might be general and yet make different provisions for different 
classes of persons and, where classes are defined narrowly, implic- 
itly favour specific individuals. Complete equality before the law 
means ‘that no attribute belonging to some individuals but not to 
others should alter their position under the law’ (1955: 36). Hayek 
insists that we should strive towards this goal, but grants that it ‘is 
probably both unattainable and undesirable’ (ibid.: 36). He does 
not object in principle to laws that single out a particular group, 
e.g. women, or the blind, or people above a certain age, so long as 
the legitimacy of the distinction is acknowledged by those inside 
the group as well as those outside it. Yet ideally, equality of the 
law aims to equally improve ‘the chances of yet unknown persons’ 
and is ‘incompatible with benefiting or harming known persons 
in a predictable manner’ (209-10, 153-5). 

Hayek denies that justice is an attribute of law, independent 
of its generality, certainty and equality. If a law ‘confines itself to 


124 


REQUIREMENTS OF THE RULE OF LAW 


regulating the relations between different persons and does not 
interfere with the purely private concerns of an individual,’ we 
have no test for its compatibility with a reign of freedom ‘other 
than its generality and equality’ (210). Here, as in Chapter 6, 
Hayek interprets the principle of equality to mean that the law 
should treat people alike in spite of inequalities that arise from 
nature and from nurture. Equality before the law increases the 
de facto inequalities among individuals, but these are advanta- 
geous to a free society. Also, the Rule of Law is at odds with the 
quest for distributive justice. Those who pursue it ‘will in practice 
find themselves obstructed at every move by the rule of law.’ 
Distributive justice requires government to decide what different 
individuals will receive or reward them according to someone’s 
conception of their merit. The Rule of Law demands, however, 
that individuals be treated equally under general laws, without 
regard to their particular qualities or circumstances (232). 

The laws consist of ‘general rules that apply equally to every- 
body.’ It follows that those persons who enact and apply the laws 
must also be subject to them. This requirement - that the laws 
apply equally to those who govern as well as to any private person 
- reduces the risk that the state and its agents will act oppressively 
(210). 


The Rule of Law requires an independent judiciary 

Hayek hesitates to make the ‘separation of powers’ a blanket 
requirement of the Rule of Law, since this doctrine has a variety 
of meanings, some of which Hayek disapproves of. He does insist, 
however, that the judiciary should constitute ‘a separate power’ 
from the legislature. The Rule of Law means that ‘the laying-down 


125 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


of new general rules’ must be separate from ‘their application 
to particular cases.’ These two functions ‘must be performed 
separately by two co-ordinated bodies before it can be determined 
whether coercion is to be used in a particular case.’ In practice, 
this requires ‘independent judges who are not concerned with any 
temporary ends of government’ (210-11). These judges ‘are bound 
by nothing but the law and secured against all pressure by irre- 
movability and similar safeguards’ (1955: 37). This arrangement 
helps to ensure that rules are made because of their general signifi- 
cance and not to fit particular instances. 

Judicial decision-making, as Hayek understands it, looks 
beyond particular statutes and their intent. In fact, the judge 
has no concern with ‘the hidden intentions of the maker of the 
rules’ (ibid.: 37). The judge’s task is ‘to discover the implications 
contained in the spirit of the whole system of valid rules of law.’ 
When necessary, he expresses as a general rule ‘what was not 
explicitly stated previously in a court of law or by the legislator’ 
(212). Clearly a great deal of discernment is required to grasp 
the spirit of the laws, to determine its implications for the case 
at hand, and to express this as a general rule. The judge makes 
explicit much that the law itself leaves unstated; and inevitably 
‘certain general conceptions’ will enter into the judge’s interpreta- 
tion of the law. Even so, Hayek measures judicial interpretation by 
an objective standard, namely ‘what the rules as they have been 
promulgated must mean to an impartial observer’ (1955: 37). 

The separation-of-powers doctrine, in some formulations, 
prohibits the general legislature from delegating the rule-making 
function to other bodies; but Hayek rejects this limitation. From 
the standpoint of the Rule of Law, he sees nothing wrong with 
delegating the power of making rules ‘to local legislative bodies, 


126 


REQUIREMENTS OF THE RULE OF LAW 


such as provincial assemblies or municipal councils’ or even in 
some instances to ‘some non-elective authority,’ so long as this 
authority announces these rules prior to their application and 
is made to adhere to them. What Hayek objects to in modern 
practice is not delegating legislation, but giving authorities ‘power 
to wield coercion without rule’ and expecting the courts to accept 
the exercise of such power unquestioningly (i960: 211-12; 1955: 
38-9). 


The executive, in coercing private citizens, is subject to 
legislative rules and to judicial review 

The primary function of the government or executive is to protect 
the individual against coercion by others and thus to safeguard for 
each individual a secure private sphere. To this end the executive 
enjoys a monopoly of coercive power. This function is to be distin- 
guished from the executive’s administrative or policy function, 
which is not inherently coercive, but may become so under a 
regime of central planning. Hayek insists that with the rise of 
the modern bureaucratic state, individual liberty is now mainly 
threatened by administrative power (see 202). Thus it is hardly 
surprising that The Constitution of Liberty devotes far more atten- 
tion to administration than to lawmaking or judging. 

Deciding where the executive stands, in relation to the legis- 
lature and to the courts, is, for Hayek, a major problem that is 
addressed throughout Parts II and III, especially when matters of 
‘discretion’ and ‘policy’ are discussed. Hayek regards the legisla- 
ture and the courts as distinct and separate powers, but he denies 
that this is the case with the executive. The decisive consideration 
here is not the executive’s monopoly of coercion, which arguably 


127 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


makes it more powerful than the legislature and the courts, but 
its dependence on the other powers. The legislature and the judi- 
ciary are independent of each other in that one formulates rules 
and the other interprets them. The executive, however, is bound 
in its coercive actions ‘by rules which prescribe not only when 
and where it may use coercion but also in what manner it may do 
so.’ Moreover, all of its actions of this kind are subject to judicial 
review. Hayek’s aim here is to hem in the executive, insofar as its 
use of coercion is concerned, by subordinating it to legislative 
rules, on the one hand, and judicial review, on the other. In this 
respect it is not ‘independent’ and therefore not a separate power 
(211). 

Hayek grants that administrators, like judges, must interpret 
legislative rules in order to apply them, but the substance of their 
interpretation must be subject to review by an independent court. 
In such a review, the court will impose a very strict test, deciding 
whether the administrative decision is ‘deducible from the rules 
of law and from those circumstances to which the law refers and 
which can be known to the private parties affected’ (1955: 41; i960: 
213-14). When it comes to protecting the individual from coercion 
and securing impartial justice, independent courts must have the 
last word. 


The Rule of Law safeguards fundamental rights and civil 
liberties 

Hayek’s case for freedom is not built around the idea of indi- 
vidual rights, but, nonetheless, rights are vital to his account of 
the Rule of Law. These are not to be understood as natural rights, 
in the Lockean sense, but as rights that have evolved historically 


128 


REQUIREMENTS OF THE RULE OF LAW 


and have found expression in various constitutional provisions. 
What can statements of rights add to the general argument for 
freedom? After all, under ‘a reign of freedom the free sphere of the 
individual includes all action not explicitly restricted by a general 
law’ (216). If the individual enjoys the freedom (or right) to do 
whatever a general law does not restrict, then what is gained by 
enumerating specific rights? And since any enumeration is neces- 
sarily incomplete, isn’t there a danger of depreciating rights that 
aren’t explicitly recognised? Hayek acknowledges this danger, 
but concludes that bills of rights have in the past afforded ‘an 
important protection for certain rights known to be easily endan- 
gered’ (216). 

In the Cairo Lectures, Hayek identifies the rights associated 
with ‘life, liberty, and property,’ along with liberty of speech, 
religion, the press and assembly, as essential ones; and he stresses 
the right to private property in particular, since rules of property 
determine ‘the boundaries of individual private spheres in the 
material world, and ways of voluntarily changing these bounda- 
ries’ (1955: 44). Hayek’s emphasis in The Constitution of Liberty is 
on how rights are endangered by advancing technologies (216). 
He acknowledges the importance of procedural safeguards, but 
does not expect that they will remain effective if belief in the Rule 
of Law is weakened (218-19). 

How do bills of rights serve to protect individual freedom? 
Hayek grants that neither legal guarantees of fundamental rights 
nor constitutional provisions can, in themselves, ‘prevent any 
suppression of rights by the deliberate action of the ultimate legis- 
lator’ (217). We recall that the ultimate legislator, in democracies, 
is the people, or, more precisely, public opinion or the prevailing 
sense of justice (1955: 33; i960: 217). Constitutional formulations 


129 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


of individual rights serve to ‘impress upon the public mind’ the 
value of these rights. They become ‘part of a political creed which 
the people will defend even when they do not fully understand its 
significance’ (217). 


Emergency powers, just compensation and the public 
interest 

After listing the attributes of true law, Hayek discusses govern- 
ment’s emergency powers. Here he addresses, in a somewhat 
indirect way, the vital question of how and when the Rule of Law 
is to be applied. Hayek assumes that applications of the Rule of 
Law must be governed by the public interest. This implies that 
protection for individual rights can be suspended where the 
interest of the community requires it. 

In The Constitution of Liberty, Hayek argues as follows: legal 
guarantees of individual freedom are basic to ‘the normal running 
of society,’ but they are not ‘absolute rights’ that can never be 
infringed: ‘Even the most fundamental principles of a free society 
... may have to be temporarily sacrificed when, but only when, it is 
a question of preserving liberty in the long run.’ Such a sacrifice of 
individual liberties might be necessary in a time of war, requiring 
a suspension of habeas corpus protections and even the imposi- 
tion of ‘a state of siege.’ 

Having made these points, Hayek turns quickly from broad 
emergency powers to narrower ways in which government, acting 
in ‘the public interest,’ might justifiably infringe particular liber- 
ties. Two such cases, which ‘can hardly be disputed,’ are curtailing 
freedom of speech in a situation of ‘clear and present danger’ and 
compulsory land purchase through government’s right of eminent 


130 


REQUIREMENTS OF THE RULE OF LAW 


domain. 1 Hayek goes on to insist that such cases should conform 
to a rule, so that they can be reviewed by an independent court, 
and that individuals who are affected should receive full compen- 
sation, both as a matter of justice and as a deterrent to govern- 
ment arbitrariness (217-18). 

Hayek’s third Cairo Lecture makes roughly the same points, 
but with this important difference: it offers a much more detailed 
rationale for emergency powers. As Hayek reminds us, the Rule of 
Law establishes a sphere ‘in which the individual can follow his own 
will’ and also know clearly ‘the conditions and the manner in which 
he can be coerced.’ Nevertheless, the individual’s private sphere is 
not sacrosanct under all conditions. Exceptional circumstances will 
arise ‘in which it would be in the highest interest of the Community 
that particular individuals should be made to do things as a result of 
events which they do not know and in a manner for which no rule 
provides.’ These exceptional circumstances include ‘natural catas- 
trophes’ and ‘war or other sudden dangers.’ Such events call for 
swift and concerted action, so that even the private citizen may be 
required to ‘place himself under the command of authority.’ 

Emergency powers must be exercised by ‘guardians of the 
public interest.’ These guardians must be kept in check, however, 
by an independent court, which will ‘decide on general abstract 
principles not only about the legitimacy of the interference but 
also about the appropriate compensation.’ The community, which 
benefited from the exercise of emergency powers, must bear the 
cost of compensating the individual fully for every infringement 
of his right of private property or of ‘other legally acquired rights’ 
(1955: 44-5). 

1 ‘Eminent domain’ is the phrase often used in the USA to describe what is gener- 
ally known simply as ‘compulsory purchase’ in the UK. 


131 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


Hayek does not here identify the well-informed ‘guardians of 
the common interest’ who will exercise emergency powers. One 
might assume that he has in mind the executive, or some portion 
of it, or perhaps the judges who review the executive’s actions. 
When Hayek returns to this topic much later, he assigns these 
powers to ‘an emergency committee of the Legislative Assembly,’ 
which would be ‘entitled to grant limited emergency powers until 
the Assembly as a whole could be convened.’ The full Assembly 
would then ‘determine both the extent and duration of the emer- 
gency powers granted to government’ (1979: 125). 

Hayek seems to count on the executive’s acquiescence to the 
courts and to the legislature when its use of emergency powers 
is called into question. Accordingly he is silent here about the 
possible need to curb an obdurate or despotic government. Liber- 
alism in its classical or Lockean form had assigned this responsi- 
bility ultimately to the community or to the people. It taught that 
the community, which is the source of political power, may resist 
and depose a government that consistently abuses its power (see 
Second Treatise, nos 222-30 and 240-43). The American Declara- 
tion of Independence puts it this way: if government persists in 
violating the ends for which it was formed, then ‘it is the right of 
the people to alter or to abolish it’ and to institute new govern- 
ment of such principles and form as shall seem to them ‘most 
likely to effect their safety and happiness.’ 

This is not Hayek’s kind of liberalism. He grants that commu- 
nity opinion is the ultimate authority in policy matters, but gives 
no hint that the community might forcibly change an abusive 
government. Generally speaking, Hayek opposes violent ruptures 
with the past: ‘Perhaps no violent revolution is likely to increase 
the respect for the law’ (194). He is critical in particular of the 


132 


REQUIREMENTS OF THE RULE OF LAW 


French Revolution, as it eventually unfolded, and of the line of 
modern political thought that it inspired. At the same time he 
applauds conservative writers who not only opposed the French 
Revolution, but identified progress with undirected growth and 
respect for tradition (see 55-6, 174-5, 194-5 and 400). 

To summarise, the Rule of Law aims to secure individual 
freedom, partly by identifying rights that government must 
protect. This ideal is constant, but its application depends on what 
best serves the community’s interest under prevailing conditions. 
Suspending individual rights is justified if the community’s safety 
is at stake. When it comes to the use of emergency powers, Hayek 
reasons that a short-term sacrifice of liberty may be required for 
its long-term preservation. There remains, however, the question 
of what limits on freedom are permissible in ‘normal’ times, as 
measured by the public interest. In the absence of an emergency, 
can government, acting for the community’s benefit, justifiably 
curb the liberty of individuals and coerce them, even if they have 
not disobeyed the law or violated anyone’s private sphere? Hayek 
opens this door by referring to government’s right of compulsory 
purchase. Are there other, more essential examples? We will find 
an answer to this question shortly. 


133 


9 ECONOMIC POLICY AND THE RULE OF 
LAW (CHAPTER 15) 


Hayek is primarily concerned in Chapter 15 with the problem 
of shaping and limiting government’s economic policies. Most 
of his examples show how economic life is affected, for better or 
worse, by administrative measures. Hayek thus needs criteria 
by which to measure and judge economic policies; but to articu- 
late them, he must look broadly at government’s policy role 
and consider what government may and may not do, under the 
Rule of Law, in executing its policies. His observations about 
economics are framed by these more general reflections on policy. 
In discussing these matters, Hayek presupposes or restates much 
of what he has said earlier about law and coercion and about 
the relation of the executive or administration to the lawmaking 
body. This chapter is vital for the rest of his book, since it lays the 
foundation for Hayek’s extended treatment, in Part III, of specific 
policy areas. 


What is policy? 

Hayek’s most illuminating definition of policy appears in Chapter 
14, in a brief section entitled ‘Legislation and Policy.’ He begins 
by dispelling the idea that legislation itself is a policy matter, or 
that the law is the chief instrument for carrying out some prede- 
termined long-term policy. The work of legislation is to establish 


134 


ECONOMIC POLICY AND THE RULE OF LAW 


general rules of conduct, within which government must act to 
achieve its ends. Legislation must not itself specify those ends. 
Policy, by contrast, ‘means the pursuit by government of the 
concrete, ever changing aims of the day.’ Executing policy in this 
sense is largely the work of administration: ‘Its task is the direc- 
tion and allocation of resources put at the disposal of government 
in the service of the constantly changing needs of the community’ 
(214-15; cf. Hayek, 1955: 42-3). 

These statements bring out two key points about policy. 
First, government’s broad objective in policy matters is to serve 
the community’s needs. Hayek mentions particular services that 
governments provide to citizens, ranging ‘from national defense 
to upkeep of roads, from sanitary safeguards to the policing of 
the streets,’ but all such policies must serve the needs or inter- 
ests of the community. Second, government has ‘resources’ at its 
disposal, to be used in pursuing its policies. Faced with urgent 
tasks, it must direct and allocate these resources, which include 
both its material means and its paid servants. Since professional 
administrators inevitably grasp for more, Hayek stresses that 
agencies entrusted with special tasks ‘must confine themselves to 
the means specially granted to them’ (215). A crucial question, left 
unanswered at this point, is how government obtains its material 
resources. 


Tests of policy 

The Rule of Law governs all government’s policy actions, but 
does not necessarily limit or restrict them. The essential question 
is whether a specific policy involves coercion: ‘It is ... important 
to remember that the rule of law restricts government only in 


135 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


its coercive activities’ (206; cf. 1955: 22). If a government policy 
is coercive, it must conform to the principles of the Rule of Law. 
Hayek distinguishes between coercive measures and ‘those pure 
service activities where coercion does not enter or does so only 
because of the need of financing them by taxation’ (222). The 
taxation issue aside, these ‘pure service activities’ would not be 
restricted by the Rule of Law, unless they were to become coercive. 

Assuming that a specific policy is compatible with the Rule of 
Law, it must then be judged according to its expediency or effi- 
ciency. The question here is whether the policy will succeed or fail 
and whether its advantages will outweigh its costs (221). 

Hayek introduces the expediency test to judge how adminis- 
trative discretion is used. In order to pursue policy objectives in 
concrete situations, amid ever-changing circumstances, admin- 
istrators must act according to their judgement of what is best: 
‘Nobody disputes the fact that, in order to make efficient use of the 
means at its disposal, the government must exercise a great deal 
of discretion’ (213). Expediency is a test of whether discretionary 
actions are efficient in reaching their objectives; and economic 
analysis, especially the weighing of costs and benefits, is crucial 
in making such judgements. Having discretion allows administra- 
tors to choose from a range of legitimate options in deciding on 
the best course of action. A policy measure can be inexpedient but 
still in conformity with the Rule of Law. Moreover, an expedient 
action that harms many is permissible, if the outcome is beneficial 
overall (224-5). 

The ultimate objective of policy - that it must serve the needs 
or interests of the community - is vital for determining both a 
policy’s compatibility with the Rule of Law and its expediency, as 
we shall see. 


136 


ECONOMIC POLICY AND THE RULE OF LAW 


Excluded policies 

Some policies are excluded in principle from a free society because 
they cannot possibly be reconciled with the Rule of Law. These 
are ones that ‘cannot be achieved by merely enforcing general 
rules but, of necessity, involve arbitrary discrimination between 
persons’ (227; cf. 231). Hayek considers three types of excluded 
policies, the first of which is giving specific individuals the right to 
engage in different occupations or to provide services or commod- 
ities. Forbidding favouritism of this kind does not, in Hayek’s 
view, preclude setting job qualifications or requiring a licence to 
practise certain trades, so long as these measures follow a general 
rule that applies to any qualified person and gives each one the 
right, if passed over, to ‘have his claim examined and enforced by 
an independent court’ (227). 

Price controls, whether imposed directly by authority or 
indirectly by specifying the quantities that particular persons or 
firms can buy or sell, are incompatible with a free system for two 
reasons. First, such controls have to be administered arbitrarily 
and not according to a rule. More broadly, free markets will work 
only if individual decisions are guided by price movements. In the 
absence of prices, governments will try unsuccessfully to achieve 
similar results by direct orders (227-9). 

Finally, a government bound by the Rule of Law cannot under- 
take to reward people according to their supposed merit. Hayek 
repeats here his oft-stated objection to government pursuing 
distributive justice: it requires ‘an allocation of all resources by 
a central authority’ and also ‘that people be told what to do and 
what ends to serve.’ The administrative pursuit of distributive 
justice is incompatible with treating individuals according to 
general rules (231-3). 


137 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


Policies measured by expediency 

For policies that are compatible with the Rule of Law and the 
requirements of a free society, the question is whether their 
benefits are worth their cost. A wide range of activities, univer- 
sally undertaken by governments, fall into this category. Some 
of these furnish information that individuals need to plan their 
lives. Government’s most important function here is providing 
‘a reliable and efficient monetary system,’ but scarcely less 
important ‘are the setting of standards of weights and measures; 
the providing of information gathered from surveying, land regis- 
tration, statistics, etc; and the support, if not also the organiza- 
tion, of some kind of education.’ Other policies aim to provide 
more material services. These include sanitary and health services, 
road construction and maintenance, urban amenities, and ‘public 
works’ generally (223). 

Hayek does not favour passive government, but rather one 
that seeks many benefits for the community. While he shares 
the ‘strong presumption against government’s actively partici- 
pating in economic efforts,’ he nonetheless states that the ‘old 
formulae of laissez faire or non-intervention do not provide us 
with an adequate criterion for distinguishing between what is 
and what is not admissible in a free system’ (221, 231; cf. 257-8). 
As he explains, ‘it is the character rather than the volume of 
government activity that is important.’ In economic matters, for 
example, an active government that assists the spontaneous forces 
of the market is preferable to a less active one that does the wrong 
things. In this regard he sees himself as following the best of the 
classical liberals, such as Adam Smith (220-22). 

While Hayek does not object to government providing many 
services, he does insist strongly on two points. First, these services 


138 


ECONOMIC POLICY AND THE RULE OF LAW 


must be available to all. No citizen can be excluded arbitrarily 
from their enjoyment. Second, government must not forcibly 
monopolise the provision of these services or enjoy any special 
advantage in offering them. If possible private suppliers must be 
allowed to compete with government enterprise, or at least the 
door must not be shut to them. Both arbitrary exclusion and shel- 
tered monopoly make state coercion impermissible. 


The community's interest 

The highest standard for judging policy is neither the Rule of 
Law nor expediency, but the interest of the community. As noted 
earlier, government can in emergencies suspend individual rights 
if the community’s interest requires it. In ‘normal’ times, govern- 
ment, acting within the Rule of Law, pursues an expedient course; 
but expedient actions must aim towards an end, which ultimately 
is the community’s interest. 

What policy measures can be justified by expediency, espe- 
cially when it comes to coercing individuals? Some of Hayek’s 
formulations suggest that governmental coercion must be limited 
to cases where individuals have violated the law, especially by 
harming others: ‘Under the rule of law, government can infringe 
a person’s protected private sphere only as punishment for 
breaking an announced general rule’ (206). This statement would 
indicate that only lawbreakers need fear government’s coercive 
hand. As Hayek proceeds, however, it becomes clear that govern- 
mental coercion need not be a form of punishment. Govern- 
ment can coerce even law-abiding individuals if the community’s 
interest requires it, so long as it does so in conformity to a general 
rule and allows for review by independent courts (225). 


139 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


Taxation and compulsory military service are prime examples 
of justifiable coercion where no rules have been broken. Hayek 
grants that government’s resources come from taxation and that 
taxes are coercive (see 144, 222). Taxpayers are coerced, even 
though they have not violated the law. Coercive taxation is justi- 
fied by the community’s interest in supplying government with 
needed resources. As for military service, the community must be 
protected against its enemies, and protection requires a military 
force. How can government legitimately compel a draftee to 
submit to a kind of servitude, kill perhaps innocent people, and 
even face death himself? Coercing draftees, like taxation, is justifi- 
able on the grounds that it serves the interest of the community. 

Generally speaking, the law aims to make state coercion 
both predictable and avoidable. If I can predict what actions will 
result in my punishment, I can try to avoid those actions. In the 
absence of law, state coercion is arbitrary; it is neither predictable 
nor avoidable. Taxation and compulsory military service occupy 
something of a middle ground between strict adherence to the 
Rule of Law and arbitrariness. Taxation and compulsory military 
service are not to be avoided, but to the extent that they follow 
some rule, they are at least predictable forms of coercion and 
therefore are not arbitrary. This consideration largely deprives 
such policies ‘of the evil nature of coercion’ (143). 

There are other policy measures where Hayek appeals to the 
community’s interest in order to justify coercion. He will follow 
this path, for example, in arguing that government may force indi- 
viduals to insure themselves against risk: 

Once it becomes the recognized duty of the public to 
provide for the extreme needs of old age, unemployment, 
sickness, etc., irrespective of whether the individuals 


140 


ECONOMIC POLICY AND THE RULE OF LAW 


could and ought to have made provision themselves, and 
particularly once help is assured to such an extent that 
it is apt to reduce individual efforts, it seems an obvious 
corollary to compel them to insure (or otherwise provide) 
against those common hazards of life. 

Hayek goes on to explain that the justification in this case is 
not that people should be coerced to do what is in their individual 
interest but that, by neglecting to make provision, they would 
become a charge to the public’ (285-6). Also, government has 
the right to expropriate property at fair market value to provide 
such amenities as parks and recreation, ‘so long as the commu- 
nity approves this’ in full awareness of the costs and alternatives 
(375). Education up to a minimum standard can be made compul- 
sory. The justification, aside from the contribution to democratic 
governance, is that ‘all of us will be exposed to less risks and 
will receive more benefits from our fellows if they share with us 
certain basic knowledge and beliefs’ (377). Higher education is not 
compulsory, but the case for subsidising it ‘must rest not on the 
benefit it confers on the recipient but on the resulting advantages 
for the community at large’ (382-3). 


141 


PART III 

FREEDOM IN THE WELFARE STATE 


143 


10 SOCIALISM IN A NEW GUISE: SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND THE WELFARE STATE 
(CHAPTER 17) 


Part III of The Constitution of Liberty is devoted to policy. 
Hayek’s aim, as he explains in his Introduction, ‘will not be 
to provide a detailed program of policy but rather to state the 
criteria by which particular measures must be judged if they are 
to fit into a regime of freedom.’ This he will do by applying prin- 
ciples of freedom ‘to some of today’s critical economic and social 
issues’ (5). Hayek proceeds to develop chapters on ‘Labor Unions 
and Employment,’ ‘Social Security,’ ‘Taxation and Redistribution,’ 
‘The Monetary Framework,’ Housing and Town Planning,’ ‘Agri- 
culture and Natural Resources,’ and ‘Education and Research.’ 
These seven chapters on specific areas of policy are introduced by 
a chapter entitled ‘The Decline of Socialism and the Rise of the 
Welfare State.’ 


Advent of the welfare state 

Hayek begins by calling attention to a great change that has taken 
place in the post-war period - one that makes it more difficult 
to identify and combat freedom’s opponents. For a century up 
to the 1940s, efforts at social reform were inspired primarily by 
socialism. Reformers shared a conviction that society was moving 
inevitably towards socialism as its necessary and final goal. 
Their task, as they saw it, was to gain control of the economy by 


145 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


nationalising the means of production, distribution and exchange. 
Socialism’s ascent to power in Britain after the war added to the 
sense of its inevitability. In 1944 Hayek had published The Road to 
Serfdom, identifying doctrinaire socialism as a pressing danger to 
liberty. 

Looking back, Hayek concludes that the 1940s ‘seems to have 
marked the high tide’ of the advance of this ‘European’ form of 
socialism. It was discredited by the manifest failure of nationalisa- 
tion, which turned out to be less productive than private enter- 
prise, favourable to ‘a new arbitrary and more inescapable order 
of rank,’ and dangerous to individual liberty. Hayek would thus 
be ‘tilting at windmills’ if he were to now direct his argument 
against it. This does not mean, however, that socialism no longer 
threatens freedom. Hoping to recover their influence, socialists 
stopped referring to themselves as such. They abandoned the 
programme of nationalisation and instead promoted the idea of 
wealth redistribution, which all along had been their true aim. 
The new, nameless socialism resembles the old in its advocacy 
of central planning and economic control, and its guiding ideal - 
achieving social justice - remains the same. What has changed is 
its method. The path to social justice will be wealth distribution 
instead of nationalisation (253-5). 


Hayek and the welfare state 

One can say that the new socialism aims at ‘the welfare state,’ but 
this concept is imprecise; and Hayek must make some distinc- 
tions before proceeding to criticise it. In fact, Hayek’s rhetorical 
task is complicated by his own embrace of what some libertar- 
ians in particular would regard as welfare state policies. He points 


146 


SOCIALISM IN A NEW GUISE: SOCIAL JUSTICE AND THE WELFARE STATE 


out once more, as in Part II, that the Rule of Law limits only the 
coercive measures of government, leaving ‘a wide field’ for its non- 
coercive or pure service activities, which will clearly need to be 
financed through taxation (257-8). 

How then does Hayek’s position differ from the socialists’ 
understanding of the welfare state? Hayek explains this differ- 
ence partly by contrasting two conceptions of security, one of 
which (the socialist conception) is at odds with individual liberty. 
Hayek thinks it proper that government should try to reduce risks 
common to all, help people provide against them, and assure ‘a 
given minimum of sustenance for all;’ but it must not attempt to 
secure to individuals the income that they are thought to deserve 
in comparison with other persons. Such a conception of security 
leads inevitably to arbitrary and coercive measures, since it 
wants to use government’s administrative powers to ensure that 
particular people get the particular things that they supposedly 
deserve. As the epigraph to Part III, Hayek uses a passage from 
Tocqueville 1 to illustrate how a society that seeks security through 
increasing dependence on the state can drift into despotism and 
end up losing its liberty (258-62, 251). 

1 ‘Above this race of men stands an immense and tutelary power, which takes upon 

itself alone to secure their gratifications and to watch over their fate. That power 
is absolute, minute, regular, provident, and mild. It would be like the authority 
of a parent if, like that authority, its object was to prepare men for manhood; but 
it seeks, on the contrary, to keep them in perpetual childhood: it is well content 
that the people should rejoice, provided they think of nothing but rejoicing. For 
their happiness such a government willingly labors, but it chooses to be the sole 
agent and the only arbiter of that happiness; it provides for their security, foresees 
and supplies their necessities, facilitates their pleasures, manages their principal 
concerns, directs their industry, regulates the descent of property, and subdivides 
their inheritances; what remains, but to spare them all care of thinking and all 
the trouble of living?’ Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, trans. Henry 
Reeve, edited by Phillips Bradley (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1945): v. II, 318. 


147 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


Hayek’s sharpest criticism of the socialistic welfare state 
centres on its use of wealth redistribution to achieve social justice. 
There is a deep conflict between ‘the ideal of freedom and the 
desire to “correct” the distribution of incomes so as to make it 
more “just.”’ The pursuit of distributive justice cannot follow 
general rules. It requires that all resources be centrally allocated 
according to ‘the particular aims and knowledge of the planning 
authority.’ Eventually it leads to ‘the command economy.’ The 
Rule of Law checks this pursuit at every turn. It serves freedom by 
precluding ‘all those measures which would be necessary to insure 
that individuals will be rewarded according to another’s concep- 
tion of merit or desert rather than according to the value that their 
services have for their fellows’ (232). 

In examining Hayek’s critique of welfare state policies, I will 
focus on the dangers that he chiefly warns against and the specific 
alternatives that he offers. I begin with what Hayek regards as the 
most objectionable feature of the welfare state - its use of social 
security programmes and progressive taxation to redistribute 
wealth. To secure freedom, the state must avoid coercing citizens 
unnecessarily and also prevent them from coercing each other. 
The welfare state fails on both counts. Its social security and 
taxation policies are inherently coercive, and it fails to prevent 
labour unions from coercing workers. Moreover, the welfare 
state’s monetary policy is highly inflationary, and its policies on 
natural resource use, education and scientific research tend to 
inhibit progress. 


148 


1 1 SOCIAL SECURITY, TAXATION AND 
THE REDISTRIBUTION OF WEALTH 
(CHAPTERS 19 AND 20) 


Hayek follows up his general critique of the welfare state 
with chapters on ‘Social Security’ and ‘Taxation and Redistribu- 
tion.’ Both chapters address the issue of wealth redistribution. 
The first considers alternative ways of designing social security 
programmes, while the second considers alternative plans of 
taxation. 


Social security 

In discussing social security, Hayek considers ways of protecting 
individuals against risks associated with old age or permanent 
disability, sickness and unemployment. He lays out his preferred 
approach to insuring against need and providing for the needy, 
contrasts it to existing systems of social security, and speculates 
about the prospects for replacing or changing the current ones. 

Hayek insists that the best and cheapest arrangements for 
social security are ones that evolve gradually through ‘the constant 
re-evaluation of available resources,’ as distinguished from 
unitary systems that are set up according to some advance design. 
Unitary systems, once established, are hard to change; and like 
‘all sheltered monopolies’ they ‘become inefficient in the course 
of time’ (287). Looking back, Hayek finds that suitable provision 
for social insurance and relief was emerging in the nineteenth 


149 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


century, when the imposition of centralised government systems 
blocked this path. In England, social services had developed out 
of the idea that local communities had a duty to provide relief for 
the poor. With the growth of large cities, special agencies were 
organised nationally, often by workers themselves, to provide 
these services and to insure against risk. Hayek acknowledges that 
industrial society needs arrangements of this sort and that govern- 
ment should assist in their development (286). He is confident 
that suitable provision for risk and need will continue to emerge, 
if not thwarted by governmental policies, and that these emergent 
arrangements, unlike governmental ones, will be consistent with 
a free society (291-2). 

Hayek favours a government-assisted but decentralised plan 
that encourages - and even compels - individuals to provide 
for themselves while also making relief available to the needy. 
It requires that individuals insure themselves against such risks 
as sickness, permanent disability and perhaps unemployment. 
Saving for future needs, especially those of old age, obviously 
fits with personal responsibility; but Hayek says little here about 
saving, except to point out that governments everywhere are 
pursuing inflationary policies that rob the thrifty of much that 
they have put aside for the future (294-5; cf. 328-9). 

As a safety net, Hayek would provide public assistance, in 
an amount consistent with a society’s wealth, to persons in 
great need. He concedes that such a programme involves ‘some 
redistribution of income.’ Nevertheless, preventing destitution 
and providing a minimum level of welfare are now generally 
accepted as a public duty - one rooted at least partly in the self- 
interested ‘desire of individuals to protect themselves against 
the consequences of the extreme misery of their fellows’ (285-6, 


150 


SOCIAL SECURITY, TAXATION AND THE REDISTRIBUTION OF WEALTH 


303). The assured minimum level of assistance should be uniform 
and should be extended only in cases of ‘proved need.’ Hayek 
endorses means tests for welfare eligibility, despite their reliance 
on discretion, and rejects the widespread notion that such tests 
are degrading (301, 303-4). Defining need is particularly difficult 
in the area of healthcare, where medical advances have made it 
‘more and more clear that there is no limit to the amount that 
might profitably be spent in order to do all that is objectively 
possible’ (298). Here the benefits to the individual of additional 
treatment must be weighed against the costs, but the individual 
himself should ‘have a say’ in this decision ‘and be able, by an 
additional sacrifice, to get more attention’ (299). 

On the question of helping the unemployed, Hayek is 
unwilling to extend relief beyond the uniform minimum that is 
assured to all, except perhaps in a major depression. He opposes 
such additional relief partly because it distorts the labour market 
and partly because it subsidises the extravagant wage demands of 
labour unions. Hayek does welcome genuine insurance against 
unemployment wherever this is practicable (300-302). 

Because public assistance is extended to all, insuring against 
risk must be compulsory. Hayek reasons that if public relief is 
available even to needy individuals who neglect to help them- 
selves, some will fail to make provision against emergencies and 
many may do so inadequately. The obvious solution is ‘to compel’ 
individuals ‘to insure (or otherwise provide) against’ the hazards 
associated with old age, unemployment, sickness and so on. As 
noted earlier, Hayek justifies such coercion on the same principle 
that he had used earlier in justifying taxation and compulsory 
military service. Although ‘the community’ may not force a person 
to act in his own interest, it may nonetheless compel him to do 


151 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


what is in the community’s interest, which is preventing harm to 
its members. Compulsion is justifiable in this case because people 
who neglect to make provision ‘would become a charge to the 
public’ (286). 

Hayek’s proposals, as summarised above, are embedded 
in a scathing critique of unitary, government-controlled social 
security systems, the original of which was the ‘social insurance’ 
arrangement that Otto von Bismarck’s government enacted in 
Germany in the 1880s. Although Bismarck did not ban the private 
relief agencies that then existed, he decreed that the state would 
henceforth be the sole provider of such social services through a 
unified organisation to which everyone protected had to belong. 
The German plan went beyond compulsory insurance to require 
‘compulsory membership in a unitary organization controlled by 
the state’ (287). 

The German model spread because it was presumed to be the 
most efficient and economical way to provide universal coverage. 
Hayek grants that this might be true when centralised plans are 
first introduced, but holds that relying ‘on the gradual evolution 
of suitable institutions’ is a better solution in the long run, even if 
for a time some needs receive inadequate attention. A centralised 
design for social services shuts off ‘the constant re-evaluation of 
available resources’ and leads to long-term inefficiencies (287; cf. 
232). 

Hayek goes on to argue that compulsory social service 
monopolies were mainly attractive to socialists not because of 
their presumed efficiency, but because they provided a means of 
egalitarian redistribution. The socialists recognised that a monop- 
olistic government service could distribute benefits according to 
perceived need and also redistribute income from one group to 


152 


SOCIAL SECURITY, TAXATION AND THE REDISTRIBUTION OF WEALTH 


another, as might seem desirable. These compulsory monopolies 
were represented to the public as ‘social insurance,’ but this claim 
was deceptive. 

Insurance, properly speaking, grants protection only to those 
who can claim it through their contributions. Monopolistic social 
security programmes, by contrast, enrol those who have not 
yet had time to establish a claim. People receive ‘as a matter of 
right what they have only to a small extent paid for.’ Benefits are 
not limited to a contractual amount, or even to some necessary 
minimum, but reflect a political judgement as to an amount that 
would be adequate, regardless of a person’s need or contribution. 
Unlike genuine insurance, government plans can transfer income 
from one group to another. Pension claims, for example, are paid 
out of the taxes of those currently working, and not from income 
on capital set aside to honour these claims. Wealth is thus trans- 
ferred from the young and productive members of society to the 
elderly, a result which leads Hayek to speculate that the burden on 
the young may in the future become greater than they are willing 
to bear (288-9, 292 and 295-7). 

Hayek gives several reasons why unitary state systems of social 
security, as they have developed everywhere, pose a critical threat 
to freedom. First, these programmes are necessarily coercive. 
They designate government as the monopoly provider of certain 
services and give administrators broad discretion to distribute 
benefits to individuals according to what they are thought to 
deserve. Systems of state medicine transform doctors into paid 
servants of the state, subject to instruction by authority as to 
the provision of medical services (288-90, 300). Second, these 
programmes are at odds with a healthy democracy. This is partly 
because their very complexity defeats democratic deliberation 


153 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


about them. Neither ordinary citizens nor their elected represent- 
atives can understand these complex programmes, so they must 
depend on the judgement of a few experts who strongly favour the 
principles underlying the programme in question and are disin- 
clined to question its core principles (288-91). Also, since govern- 
ment programmes are expected to provide ‘adequate’ benefits, 
as determined politically, they are easily exploited by demagogic 
politicians and self-interested voters (296). Finally, the central 
bureaucracy that administers social security programmes also 
controls the flow of information about them. Its power to engage 
in ‘subsidized propaganda’ confers on it ‘a power over minds’ that 
is akin to that of a totalitarian state (293; cf. 291-4). 

Hayek points out that these unitary state systems are facing 
difficulties everywhere. They have placed on society ‘a steadily 
growing burden from which it will in all probability again and 
again attempt to extricate itself by inflation.’ Even so, these 
systems, once established, are very difficult to get rid of. Conceiv- 
ably sickness and unemployment allowances could be trans- 
formed gradually into systems of true insurance; but in the case 
of pensions for the aged, the rising generation, having paid for the 
needs of the preceding one, can always make a claim to support by 
the next. Any long-term changes will require the public to recon- 
sider these programmes: ‘... democracy will have to learn that it 
must pay for its own follies and that it cannot draw unlimited 
checks on the future to solve its present problems’ (304-5). 


154 


Proportional versus progressive taxation 

When it comes to governmental efforts to redistribute wealth, 
Hayek sees the progressive income tax as an even greater threat 


SOCIAL SECURITY, TAXATION AND THE REDISTRIBUTION OF WEALTH 


to freedom than the welfare state’s social security policies. 
Progressive taxation redistributes wealth more efficiently than 
such policies; without it, the scope of redistribution ‘would be 
very limited.’ Moreover, its appeal is broader: ‘Redistribution by 
progressive taxation has come to be almost universally accepted 
as just.’ Whether joined to the welfare state or not, progres- 
sive taxation is now ‘the chief means of redistributing incomes.’ 
Moreover, it is the main source of democratic irresponsibility and 
governmental arbitrariness (306-8). 

Hayek advocates proportional taxation, which applies a 
constant rate to everyone. With a progressive system, by contrast, 
the rate of taxation increases as the amount being taxed increases. 
The wealthy pay more under both systems, but at an escalating 
rate under a progressive one. Hayek uses historical evidence to 
illustrate his claim that there is no limit, in principle, to how high 
a progressive rate can go. When a progressive income tax was 
introduced in Prussia in 1891, the upper rate was 4 per cent. In 
1910 Great Britain followed suit, as did the USA in 1913, setting 
the upper rate at ‘8Vt and 7 percent, respectively. Yet within 
thirty years these figures had risen to 97V2 and 91 percent’ (310). 
This outcome is not surprising to Hayek, since ‘all arguments 
in support of progression can be used to justify any degree of 
progression’ (313). 

The case for progressive taxation, as Hayek presents it, rests 
mainly on four claims, which we may call scientific, political, expe- 
dient and moral; and his aim is chiefly to refute these particular 
claims. 

The advocates of progressive taxation hoped to give it scien- 
tific respectability by appealing to utility analysis, specifically 
to the principle that income has a diminishing marginal utility. 


155 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


Their argument can be put this way: a rising income is satisfying, 
especially to poor people; but beyond a certain level of need, the 
satisfaction derived from income diminishes with the addition of 
each new increment. This means that taxing the wealthy at a high 
marginal rate will have little effect on their wellbeing, whereas 
a transfer of wealth will greatly enhance the wellbeing of the 
poor. Hayek replies only briefly to this argument, since he thinks 
that the field of utility analysis has abandoned interpersonal 
comparisons of utilities, and since he doubts that the principle of 
decreasing marginal utility properly applies to income, broadly 
understood as ‘all the advantages a person derives from the use of 
his resources’ (309). 

The political case rests on the idea that progressive taxation 
is democratic or, more precisely, that it reflects the will of the 
majority in communities where it has been enacted. Hayek does 
not object in principle to the majority determining tax policy, 
so long as it doesn’t ‘impose a discriminatory tax burden on a 
minority’ or try to determine what an ‘appropriate’ income would 
be (322). The problem, in practice, is that groups with the greatest 
voting strength have used progressive taxation to shift the tax 
burden to the wealthier classes. The majority, perhaps to gratify 
its envy, can push tax rates to confiscatory levels. From Hayek’s 
standpoint, this self-interested strategy is both wrong and short 
sighted. The strategy is wrong, because the majority, instead of 
applying a general rule, exempts itself from a policy that it applies 
to others: ‘the majority which determines what the total amount 
of taxation should be must also bear it at the maximum rate’ (322). 
The strategy is short sighted, because inflation gradually brings 
the middle classes under the higher rates, without raising their 
real income. Moreover, taxing the rich at a high rate produces 


156 


SOCIAL SECURITY, TAXATION AND THE REDISTRIBUTION OF WEALTH 


much less revenue than is generally recognised. Hayek estimates 
that British expenditures on subsidies and services are ‘financed 
mainly by the contributions of the middle and upper ranges of the 
middle class’ (313; cf. 311-13, 315). 

Progressive taxation is put forward as an expedient or advan- 
tageous policy, but Hayek contests this claim on economic 
grounds. One of his objections to high marginal tax rates is that 
they impede capital formation, thus slowing economic growth. 
Potential savers and investors are the ones hit hardest by high 
marginal tax rates, especially those persons who expend efforts 
over time or take risks that might yield large gains in a single 
year. Moreover, high marginal rates reduce the incentive for 
individuals to increase their earnings within a given tax year and, 
what is even more harmful, they misdirect resources by diverting 
people’s energies to less useful activities (316-18). To build up a 
new business or succeed in a new enterprise, individuals must 
control considerable resources; and acquiring a fortune in a 
short time period should be seen as ‘a legitimate form of remu- 
neration’ for this kind of activity. Discouraging individual capital 
formation restricts competition, inasmuch as it strengthens ‘the 
position of the established corporations against newcomers.’ 
In effect, ‘the tax collector’ shelters old firms from competition. 
Also, by preventing ‘the dangerous newcomer from accumulating 
any capital,’ progressive taxation ‘checks economic progress and 
makes for rigidity’ (320-21; cf. 318-20). 

Progressive taxation has sometimes been justified on the basis 
of capacity to pay, but this argument was superseded by the claim 
that such a system produces ‘a more just distribution of income’ 
(311). Hayek grants that justice is an appropriate standard for 
weighing tax systems, but argues that steeply progressive ones are 


157 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


themselves unjust. A just system of taxation, as Hayek conceives 
it, is one that is limited by a principle or rule that applies to 
everyone. Progressive taxation is not constrained by any such 
limiting principle. It applies different rules to different people, 
depending on their degree of wealth; and it has no principled 
way of deciding who should be taxed and how much. Progres- 
sive systems permit a majority ‘to impose a discriminatory tax 
burden on a minority.’ By making actual income relative to one’s 
tax rate, they violate ‘what is probably the only universally recog- 
nized principle of economic justice, that of “equal pay for equal 
work.’” A whole class of persons is practically deprived of the 
normal incentives because their income is not in line with the rest. 
None of these progressive measures can be defended on grounds 
of justice (313-17, 322). 

Proportional taxation meets Hayek’s standard of justice. It 
applies the same general rule to everyone, prevents discrimina- 
tion against the wealthy and, by requiring that political majori- 
ties abide by the rules they enact, deters high rates of taxation. 
Since the principle of proportionality, like that of progressivity, 
does not itself specify appropriate rates of taxation, Hayek specu- 
lates that the maximum admissible rate of direct taxation might 
reasonably be set ‘at that percentage of the total national income 
which the government takes in taxation.’ It should be noted that 
Hayek does not object to a majority granting ‘to an economically 
weak minority some relief in the form of a proportionately lower 
taxation.’ Also, to compensate for the effects of indirect taxation, 
he grants that ‘some progression in personal income taxation is 
probablyjustified’ (332-3). 


158 


12 STOPPING COERCION IN EMPLOYMENT 
(CHAPTER 18) 


Hayek points out in an earlier chapter that most people today 
work as employees of large organisations. Some employees are 
unionised workers; and it is with reference to them that Hayek 
takes up the problem of coercion in employment. Hayek acknow- 
ledges at one point that coercion should ‘be treated as equally 
illegitimate whether employed for or against organization, by 
the employer or by the employees;’ but he is mostly silent about 
preventing employer coercion, except to recommend contrac- 
tual arrangements that provide for a grievance procedure and 
some degree of employee self-government. Generally speaking, 
Hayek takes the view that workers’ interests are best served by 
encouraging competition among many employers; and it is likely 
that he would argue that the need to compete for workers is the 
most effective check on employer coercion. He acknowledges 
that workers have the right to voluntary agreement among them- 
selves and also the right to ‘withhold their services in concert,’ 
but thinks that there are certain employments where the right to 
strike should be renounced contractually (278, 276-7, 269). 


Coercive unionism 

Unions employ coercion to gain benefits for their own members, 
especially higher wages. In fact, ‘raising wages by the use of 


159 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


coercion is today the main aim of unions’ (275). Having a 
monopoly of labour is crucial to this aim, for if unions effectively 
control all the potential workers, employers must bargain with 
them. Unions thus use coercive means ‘to force unwilling workers 
into membership and to keep non-members out of employment’ 
(268). If governments followed the Rule of Law, they would prevent 
coercive labour monopolies; but instead they have sanctioned or 
tolerated hostile picketing in large numbers, closed or union shop 
contracts, and secondary strikes and boycotts - all techniques 
that Hayek would prohibit (274-5, 278-9). Unions get away with 
coercive techniques partly because they wield great political influ- 
ence and partly because the public mistakenly thinks that union 
activities benefit the entire working class. Economists can render a 
public service by correcting this misconception (273-4). 

Unions claim to benefit all workers by raising the general 
level of wages. To refute this claim, Hayek builds on a distinc- 
tion between real wages and money wages - a distinction that 
had been important to his business cycle theory and his critique 
of Keynesian economics. In a 1942 essay he notes that ‘real wages’ 
commonly refers to ‘the relation between wages as received by 
the worker and the prices of the commodities on which he spends 
those wages.’ By this definition, which centres on the worker’s 
purchasing power, real wages can increase if the prices of desired 
commodities go down or decrease if their prices go up. Inflation 
pushes up money wages but not real wages, since the price of the 
goods purchased by workers also rises (1948: 252). 

Hayek has no doubt that unions can increase workers’ money 
wages, but can they increase real wages for all? Hayek’s answer 
turns on a distinction between ‘all the employed’ and ‘all wishing 
to work.’ By limiting the supply of labour, unions might be able to 


160 


STOPPING COERCION IN EMPLOYMENT 


increase the real wages of their own members and perhaps even 
those of all the employed; but as a result some workers will be 
unable to find jobs. As Hayek explains, ‘the real wages of all the 
employed can be raised by union action only at the price of unem- 
ployment.’ Taking unemployed workers into account, unions 
‘cannot in the long run increase real wages for all wishing to work 
above the level that would establish itself in a free market.’ Besides 
distorting the wage structure, the practice of excluding workers 
from highly paid occupations produces inequalities among 
workers and amounts to ‘the exploitation of the relatively poor 
by the better-off.’ Also, while union activities can increase the real 
wages of employed workers, empirical evidence shows that real 
wages ‘have often risen much faster when unions were weak than 
when they were strong.’ Hayek concludes that coercive unionism, 
despite its claim to benefit all workers, serves the interest of a 
particular group. It increases real wages for organised workers, 
but pits them against others who ‘will find employment only in 
the less highly paid jobs’ or else ‘will not be employed at all’ (270; 
cf. 270-71). 

An argument heard frequently today is that real wages have 
steadily lagged behind society’s overall productivity gains, so that 
for workers to receive their just share of the fruits of economic 
growth, the power of unions to bargain on their behalf must be 
strengthened. This argument assumes that union practices raise 
productivity. Hayek undercuts it by insisting that union practices 
lower productivity, rather than enhancing it. In most European 
countries, unions employ ‘restrictive policies of a “make-work” 
character’ that ‘necessarily reduce the productivity of labor all 
around and therefore also the general level of real wages’ (271; cf. 
272-3). 


161 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


Economic and political dangers 

Hayek’s principled objection to coercive unionism is that it 
violates the Rule of Law. But he also argues that union wage 
policy is ‘economically very harmful and politically exceedingly 
dangerous’ (272). Some of these economically harmful conse- 
quences - distortion of the wage structure, unjustified inequalities 
among workers, diminished productivity - we have mentioned. 
Union activities also restrict the mobility of labour, disadvantage 
some industries more than others, and (often in collusion with 
enterprise) produce monopolies that limit competition (280-81). 
But why, besides causing economic harm, are union policies 
‘exceedingly dangerous’ politically? Hayek fears that these policies 
will lead to a ‘system of over-all socialist planning’ (273) or ‘the 
transformation of the whole of society into a centrally planned 
and administered system’ (282). 

Hayek identifies two distinct but related causes that can 
produce this dangerous result: the crippling of market alloca- 
tions; and runaway inflation. The first point is that unions, by 
establishing monopolies in the supply of labour, ‘prevent compe- 
tition from acting as an effective regulator of the allocation of all 
resources.’ Yet the only alternative to the market as a means of 
such regulation is ‘direction by authority,’ which in practice would 
mean central planning by the state (272-3). Hayek’s second point 
is that steep and prolonged inflation, resulting from an uncontrol- 
lable wage-price spiral, will eventually cause serious public alarm 
and provoke demands ‘either for the fixing of wages by govern- 
ment or for the complete abolition of the unions’ (282). 

Union wage policies cannot alone cause inflation to grow. 
Excessively high wages would simply produce j ob losses, if govern- 
ment did not expand the supply of money and credit in order to 


162 


STOPPING COERCION IN EMPLOYMENT 


ensure full employment (see 337). Hayek attributes this ruinous 
governmental policy to Keynesian economics. Keynes recognised 
that excessively high wages cause extensive unemployment, but 
at the same time he saw that any direct attempt to lower wages 
would require ‘a struggle so painful and prolonged that it could 
not be contemplated.’ Keynes’s solution was to lower real wages 
by lowering the value of money: ‘If labor insists on a level of 
money wages too high to allow of full employment, the supply of 
money must be so increased as to raise prices to a level where the 
real value of the prevailing money wages is no longer greater than 
the productivity of the workers seeking employment’ (280). 

A full employment policy requires the monetary authori- 
ties to ‘provide enough money to secure full employment at any 
given wage level.’ Such a monetary policy creates expectations of 
rising inflation. If the money supply is tightened to stop inflation, 
substantial unemployment will quickly result, bringing about ‘a 
renewed and irresistible pressure for more inflation’ (281). Eventu- 
ally the public, alarmed by spiralling inflation, will demand the 
drastic actions mentioned above - wage-fixing by government 
and even the abolition of unions. While opposing the goal of full 
employment, Hayek does hold that it is possible to secure ‘a high 
and stable level of employment’ while aiming at the stability of 
some comprehensive price level (337). 

Hayek is no fatalist. He holds out hope that the dangers he 
foresees from coercive unionism can be averted. This would 
require that unions conform to the Rule of Law, which in practice 
means that government would prevent unions from using 
coercion to attain their goals. Hayek does not wish to eliminate 
unions, for this would violate their freedom of association. In fact, 
he emphasises that unions would continue to have ‘a useful and 


163 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


important role,’ even with the elimination of their power to coerce 
individuals. Unions could take part in collective negotiations to 
settle compensation issues, such as choosing among alternative 
benefits, setting differences in remuneration for different jobs, 
and deciding on rules of promotion. Unions could help to deter- 
mine rules governing the conditions of work, including griev- 
ance procedures and some degree of employee self-government. 
Finally, unions could return to the original model of ‘friendly soci- 
eties,’ helping members to protect themselves against the risks 
of their trade. Unions would be excluded, however, from partici- 
pating in the conduct of business (276-7). Hayek rests his hopes 
for reform on the possibility that the public, along with ‘farsighted 
union leaders,’ will recognise the dangers inherent in coercive 
unionism and agree to re-establish the Rule of Law in the work- 
place (284). 


164 


13 PREVENTING INFLATION (CHAPTER 21) 


In the mid-1970s, looking back on a long career, Hayek would 
write that ‘the task of preventing inflation has always seemed to 
me to be of the greatest importance’ (2009: 128). Certainly this 
concern is evident in The Constitution of Liberty, which warns 
repeatedly of inflation’s grave consequences. Chapter 21, entitled 
‘The Monetary Framework’, addresses the problem of inflation 
in three ways: it summarises the inflationary effects of welfare 
state policies; it demonstrates that monetary policy is central to 
the problem at hand; and it considers how best to arrange the 
monetary system so as to prevent inflation. In reading this present 
chapter, one should keep in mind that Hayek will later reject 
the monetary arrangement proposed here and embrace a quite 
different one. 


Inflation and the welfare state 

Hayek has identified several reasons why welfare state policies 
are inflationary. Inflation helps to extricate governments from 
the heavy financial burden of social security programmes, espe- 
cially old-age pensions. Inflation expands government revenues, 
under systems of progressive taxation, by moving taxpayers into 
higher tax brackets, so that their taxable income goes up without 
a proportional increase in their disposable income. Government’s 


165 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


full employment policies, combined with coercive wage pres- 
sures by unions, lead to spiralling inflation. Hayek points out that 
welfare state policies and inflation have a reciprocal relationship, 
inasmuch as inflation’s effects have ‘strengthened the demand for 
welfare measures’ (328). 

Hayek regards inflation as ‘infinitely more dangerous’ in the 
long term than deflation, so the primary goal of monetary policy 
must be to prevent it. His position runs counter to ‘the existing 
inflationary bias,’ which rests on the erroneous belief that defla- 
tion is the greater danger (330). Technically speaking, inflation 
is much easier to prevent than deflation, but psychological and 
political factors make it difficult to adopt the proper measures. 
This is because inflation is more pleasant in its immediate effects 
and deflation more painful. Inflation seems to offer governments 
an easy way out of deflation, but this is to disregard its long- 
term disadvantages - a myopic outlook that Keynes sanctioned 
by the ‘fundamentally antiliberal aphorism, “in the long run we 
are all dead.’” To maintain its stimulative effects, even mild infla- 
tion must be ‘progressively accelerated.’ This disrupts business 
planning, making it more difficult to determine real costs, profits 
or income. Inflation deters investments by taxing profits more 
heavily and also erodes savings. Hayek warns again, as he had 
earlier, that severe inflation can eventually undermine a free 
society (337-9). For these reasons, ‘the economist should always 
stress the dangers of inflation’ (333). 


166 


Misguided monetary policy 

Besides continually warning against inflation, Hayek pins respon- 
sibility for it directly on government: inflation ‘is always the result 


PREVENTING INFLATION 


of the weakness or ignorance of those in charge of monetary policy 
- though the division of responsibility may be spread so wide that 
nobody is to blame’ (295). Much of the present chapter is devoted 
to ways of maintaining a stable monetary system - one that can 
reasonably expect to achieve ‘a high and stable level of employ- 
ment’ as well as ‘the stability of some comprehensive price level’ 
( 337 ). 

One option would be to deprive governments of their control 
over monetary policy and rely on spontaneous market forces to 
correct inflation and deflation. The market-only option, while 
perhaps feasible at one time, is no longer practicable or even 
desirable, and this is for three reasons: first, the need for a central 
agency to control rapid and disruptive changes in the relative 
supply of money or the demand for it (money is ‘a kind of loose 
joint in the otherwise self-steering mechanism of the market,’ 
hindering any direct return to a new equilibrium); second, the 
need to deal with spontaneous fluctuations in the supply of money 
resulting from ‘the interacting money and credit systems;’ and 
third, the need to take account of government’s financial policy, 
which necessarily dominates monetary policy in an era of massive 
expenditures. It is thus inevitable, under modern conditions, that 
control of monetary arrangements ‘should be largely exercised by 
governments’ (325; cf. 324-7; see Hayek, 1941 [2007a]: 367). 

Having argued that the money supply should be controlled 
by some government agency, Hayek must now decide how much 
discretion to allow it. One possibility is to impose some mechan- 
ical rule that aims for long-term monetary stability but ties the 
agency’s hands in the short term and insulates it from political 
pressures. Some economists have advocated restrictive rules of 
this kind. Others would require that currency be convertible into 


167 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


gold or other commodities. Hayek doubts, however, that any of 
these mechanical solutions were practicable at that time (333-5). 
Discretion here can be limited, but never eliminated. In fact, 
central banks require ‘much discretion’ to fulfil their task of fore- 
stalling or counteracting ‘developments in the realm of credit, 
for which no simple rules can provide sufficient guidance.’ Addi- 
tionally, when it comes to preventing great fluctuations in prices 
and employment, a central bank cannot always wait ‘until rule or 
mechanism forced it to take action’ (336). 


The denationalisation of money 

By the mid-1970s, Hayek had concluded that any central bank that 
monopolises the issuance of all kinds of money would succumb 
to political pressures and eventually inflate the currency to 
dangerous levels. Thus he came to advocate ‘the denationalisa- 
tion of money,’ which deprives government of its monopoly of the 
issue of money and permits banks to offer competing currencies, 
though not the official one (Hayek, 1978b [2009]). In The Consti- 
tution of Liberty, Hayek wrestles with the problem of achieving 
monetary stability even while leaving governmental institutions 
in control of the money supply. His later strategy, by ending 
this government monopoly or ‘denationalising’ money, offers a 
market-based solution to the problem. Having to compete with 
other currencies would ‘impose a very necessary discipline upon 
the governmental issue of currency through the threat of its being 
displaced by a more reliable one.’ With citizens free to choose 
the most trustworthy currency, government would ‘be deprived 
not only of one of the main means of damaging the economy and 
subjecting individuals to restrictions of their freedom but also of 


168 


PREVENTING INFLATION 


one of the chief causes of its constant expansion.’ While severely 
limiting government’s discretion in matters of monetary policy, 
Hayek does see a need for considerable discretion in its manage- 
ment of financial policy. As ‘the biggest spender and investor,’ 
government should, insofar as practicable, ‘distribute its expendi- 
ture over time in such a manner that it will step in when private 
investment flags, and thereby employ resources for public invest- 
ment at the least cost and with the greatest benefit to society’ 
(1979: 59; cf. 57-8). 

In view of Hayek’s later position, it should be mentioned 
that in The Constitution of Liberty he does question, in a lengthy 
footnote, whether central banks should monopolise the issue of 
all kinds of money: ‘there seems to be no reason whatever why 
the state should ever prohibit the use of other kinds of media of 
exchange, be it some commodity or money issued by another 
agency, domestic or foreign’ (520-21). The footnote does not 
consider whether competition from private banks might be suffi- 
cient to restrain government’s monetary institutions. 


169 


14 SAFEGUARDING PROGRESS (CHAPTERS 
22, 23, 24) 


Hayek concludes his discussion of freedom in the welfare state 
with chapters on housing and town planning, agriculture and 
natural resources, and education and research. These policy areas, 
like the ones we examined earlier, involve issues of wealth redis- 
tribution, but more broadly they raise questions about progress 
- what it means, why it is threatened by current policies, and how 
best to ensure its continuation. 

The complex problems of rural and city life and of dwindling 
natural resources have a common origin in the advance of modern 
technology. Hayek points out that the Industrial Revolution 
was preceded and made possible by a revolution in agriculture, 
which made it possible for a smaller number of farmers to feed 
the populace. Many rural inhabitants then moved to the cities and 
took up industrial pursuits, which themselves were highly produc- 
tive and greatly beneficial to both urban and rural consumers. The 
decline in the size of the farming population is often lamented 
on economic and aesthetic grounds; but Hayek sees this decline 
as a necessary and beneficial adaptation to technological change. 
As for cities, their growth was determined mostly by undirected 
market forces and not by advance planning. In Hayek ’s view, ‘the 
market has, on the whole, guided the evolution of cities more 
successfully, though imperfectly, than is commonly realized;’ and 
proposals for a system of central direction ‘show little awareness 


170 


SAFEGUARDING PROGRESS 


of what such a system would have to accomplish, even to equal the 
market in effectiveness’ (342; cf. 358-9, 363, 366, 525, n. 8). 

Hayek relies chiefly on markets to ameliorate problems of 
land use, population imbalances and possible resource depletion. 
Central planning cannot solve these problems, and it is likely to 
make them worse. Good policies will facilitate adaptation and 
help markets work effectively. 

Besides considering where progress has brought us, Hayek 
looks ahead to the requirements for its continuation. Progress 
is driven above all by new knowledge. Indeed, the emergence 
and spread of knowledge is a large part of what Hayek means by 
progress. As we will see, this forward-looking stance is particularly 
evident in his concluding discussion of education and research 
policy. 


Urban policy 

Hayek traces human progress to the growth of cities. Urban 
life was responsible not only for enormous increases in indus- 
trial production and material comforts, but also for advances 
in science and art. The advantages of civilization over primitive 
society are due to the city; and since its products can be enjoyed 
in the country, a leisured life in the country has come to be seen as 
‘the ideal of a cultured life’ in advanced civilisations. Yet despite 
its indispensable contribution to civilisation and to progress, the 
city ‘is at the same time responsible for the darkest blotches on 
this civilization.’ City life produces a level of poverty and outward 
signs of squalor that fellow men find shocking and scarcely toler- 
able (340-41). 

Hayek has no objection to planning as a way to deal with 


171 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


problems of urban life, so long as it is voluntary. The important 
consideration is whether planning aims ‘to supplement and assist 
the market or to suspend it and put central direction in its place.’ 
By relying on markets, voluntary planning can make ‘full use of 
the dispersed knowledge of the prospects and possibilities of 
development.’ To be sure, the price mechanism is sometimes an 
imperfect guide, as in determining whether an urban property 
owner’s actions have benefited or harmed his neighbours; but 
generally it conveys information that is indispensable to voluntary 
planning (341, 349-50, 352). 

Hayek objects to some urban planning measures (rent restric- 
tions, public housing and subsidised housing) because they 
subject segments of the population to arbitrary decisions and 
make them dependent on authority for direction in their lives 
(344). He regards some other measures, such as building regula- 
tions and permits, as necessary and desirable, but warns that 
they are frequently used ‘to impose harmful or wholly irrational 
restrictions on development’ and also to ‘strengthen the quasi- 
monopolistic positions of local producers’ (355). Controlling land 
use is one of the principal ways in which urban planners try to 
channel economic growth. Planners might, for example, specify 
where industry and commerce can be located or clear away slum 
housing in the city’s centre so as to promote some alternative use 
of the land. 

Hayek does not reject land use planning as such, but recog- 
nises that it can make matters worse by preventing evolutionary 
solutions and by depriving individual owners of an interest 
in putting their land to better use. In no case should planners 
expropriate land below fair market value. As for clearing slums, a 
market solution would be to charge slum properties for the costs 


172 


SAFEGUARDING PROGRESS 


they impose on the rest of the city. The slums would probably 
disappear and be replaced by commercial or industrial buildings. 
Slum clearance is hard to justify, however, in terms of what is good 
for the slum dwellers. The poor find it economically advantageous 
to live in centrally located slums; and public housing is not a desir- 
able option. Subsidising people to remain in the city has the effect 
of stimulating ‘the growth of cities beyond the point where it is 
economically justifiable.’ Moreover, it deliberately creates ‘a class 
dependent on the community for the provision of what they are 
presumed to need.’ A logical next step for planners, in addressing 
urban problems, would be to control who will be allowed to move 
into a city. Their inclination, in any event, is to subject the whole 
economy to ‘administrative despotism’ (347-8, 351, 354). 


Agricultural policy 

Agricultural policy in Western countries must face up to the 
fact that a population’s food requirements, even if growing, can 
be met by fewer farmers than ever before, owing to enormous 
gains in agricultural productivity. Having too many agricultural 
workers depresses average farm income and produces rural 
poverty. Although agriculture is ‘peculiarly sluggish in its adap- 
tation to change,’ rural workers themselves have gradually dealt 
with their plight by moving to other jobs, particularly in urban 
industries. Governments should encourage and facilitate this 
redistribution of workers by allowing the marginal land and 
farms to be eliminated. With fewer workers supplying agricultural 
products, average farm income would rise and might keep up with 
the general increase in incomes. In fact, however, governments 
have delayed the necessary adjustment by trying to maintain a 


173 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


much larger agricultural workforce than markets alone would 
require. The primary tools of this misguided policy are subsidies 
and controls. Price supports and other farm subsidies amount to 
‘compulsory transfers of income from the urban to the agricul- 
tural population.’ More dangerous, in terms of direct coercion, 
are efforts to control prices and production. Current agricultural 
policy, to be successful, requires authoritative decisions as to ‘who 
is to produce, how much, and what.’ Such a policy leaves little 
room for individual freedom and leads towards ‘a totalitarian 
control of all economic activity’ (362; cf. 360, 361-2). 

How might government properly address the genuine and 
important problems faced by agricultural workers? In Hayek’s 
view, no planning is needed in this area. Generally economic 
markets should be allowed to take their course. Only the pressure 
of prices, by producing ‘the necessary reduction in the agricul- 
tural population’ and encouraging the adoption of new agricul- 
tural techniques, can ‘lower cost and make the survival of the 
suitable units possible.’ Beyond this, there are two specific func- 
tions that government ought to perform. First, it should gradually 
improve legal institutions with a view to making markets work 
more effectively. Here Hayek takes note of the benefits derived 
in medieval Europe from the consolidation of dispersed holdings 
and in England from enclosures of the commons. His point is that 
legal changes might still be required to bring ‘appropriate units 
of enterprise under single control’ and to foster ‘group collabora- 
tion.’ Achieving this result might require ‘compulsory expropria- 
tion,’ but with proper safeguards. Second, government ought to 
provide a variety of services to agricultural workers, especially 
informing them about the benefits of technological innovations 
(see 360, 364-5)- 


174 


SAFEGUARDING PROGRESS 


Natural resource policy 

The latter half of Chapter 23 addresses indirectly this enduring 
question: how is humankind to regard ‘a free gift of nature’? 
With some exceptions, Hayek views nature’s gifts as an available 
supply or ‘resource’ to be used in fostering economic progress. 
Much government policy, by contrast, is premised on the idea 
that natural resources have a special standing, such that they must 
be preserved and protected from exploitation by private enter- 
prise, even with far-reaching controls that greatly limit individual 
freedom. Hayek replies that a natural resource should be treated 
the same way as other resources, such as ‘man-made equipment 
or human capacities,’ that might be invested in productive activity 
(367, 373-4). 

Hayek points out that some natural resources are diminished 
by use and are eventually used up, while others can be so managed 
as to yield a durable stream of benefits. In either case, however, he 
has no objection to exhausting a natural resource, if that appears 
to be the best strategy to maximise income. The market offers 
better foresight in these matters than government planning; and 
one lesson of advancing technology has been that new and unan- 
ticipated resources will emerge to replace existing ones (368-70, 
374). 

Most of the arguments for ‘government control of private 
activity in the interest of conservation of natural resources’ are, in 
Hayek’s view, invalid. He recognises an exception, however, where 
the aim is not income maximisation, but providing recreational 
opportunities and preserving natural beauty or sites of historical 
or scientific interest. Such amenities render a service to the public 
at large, providing advantages for which the individual beneficiary 
cannot be charged a price. Also, they usually require large tracts 


175 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


of land. These considerations make the provision of such ameni- 
ties ‘an appropriate field for collective effort.’ Voluntary efforts in 
this field are desirable, but Hayek does not object to government 
using its compulsory powers to acquire the land needed for such 
amenities, ‘so long as the community approves this, in full aware- 
ness of the cost, and realizes that this is one aim competing with 
others and not a unique objective overriding all other needs’ (375; 
cf. 374 - 5 )- 


Education and research policy 

Hayek’s discussion of education is divided roughly into two 
parts. The first considers education as it might be typified by 
the elementary school. The second part discusses education as 
typically provided by the research university, whose aim is not 
only to disseminate knowledge by instruction, but also to advance 
knowledge by path-breaking research. The community has an 
interest in supporting both kinds of education, but for different 
reasons. Also, both kinds are relevant to progress and to freedom, 
but in different ways. 

While parents have the primary responsibility for the educa- 
tion of their children, the ‘other members of the community have 
a genuine stake’ in their welfare. First, the community benefits 
when knowledge is disseminated widely and used effectively. The 
spread of useful knowledge increases material opportunities for 
large numbers of people. Second, if a community is governed by 
democratic institutions, these are not likely to work well if there 
is widespread illiteracy. Finally, the community has a stake in 
‘maintaining certain standards of values,’ especially when immi- 
grant populations must be assimilated: ‘all education must be and 


176 


SAFEGUARDING PROGRESS 


ought to be guided by definite values.’ A general education can 
be an effective way to spread common values and thereby ensure 
‘a peaceful common existence.’ Hayek warns, however, that the 
attempt to inculcate values is ‘the source of real dangers in any 
system of public education.’ A government policy of providing 
a common cultural background for all citizens ‘can lead to fric- 
tions in multinational states.’ Even in ethnically homogeneous 
states, there is a danger that government will exert ‘a high degree 
of control of the contents of education’ or impose some particular 
theory of education that claims to be scientific. 

General education aims more at preserving civilisation than 
at novelty. It advances material wealth, but within an established 
order whose traditions and values it affirms. General education 
must be compulsory up to a point and government must fund 
it. This does not mean, however, that general education must 
be provided in state-run schools. Here the danger of imposing a 
single set of values or a single theory of education would be great. 
While the community has an interest in maintaining common 
values, its overriding interest lies in preserving freedom; and 
it best achieves this by sponsoring a wide variety of educational 
arrangements. Hayek points to voucher systems as a way for 
government to defray the costs of general education without 
monopolising instruction (378-81). 

University education, by contrast, is not intended to conserve 
established ways or to be immediately useful. The community’s 
interest in supporting university education lies chiefly in the long- 
term contribution it makes to overall progress or to ‘the growth 
of civilization.’ Universities spur progress mainly through the 
advancement of new knowledge or ‘the conception and pursuit of 
new ideas,’ and this ‘will always be the work of the relatively few.’ 


177 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


Hayek urges ‘that there should be as many independent centers of 
work as possible,’ providing capable and devoted researchers with 
the freedom to reach and expound their own conclusions, regard- 
less of whether these conclusions ‘are palatable to their employer 
or the public at large’ (389-90). 

Academic freedom is granted to universities to protect them 
against outside pressures to affirm the prevailing conventions 
and values. While approving the doctrine of academic freedom, 
Hayek warns that conformist pressures often come from within 
the university. In particular, he opposes ‘the ideal of a unified and 
centralized direction of scientific efforts,’ whether directed by 
outside authorities or by some committee of distinguished scien- 
tists (391). The planning of science must inevitably fail to reach 
its objectives, because the outcome of scientific research is unpre- 
dictable. It depends in large degree on accident and on unfore- 
seeable events. No one can say in advance what line of inquiry or 
what particular researcher will be successful. Hayek expects that 
individual scientists, making the best use of their opportunities, 
will more likely succeed in making important discoveries than 
research teams (392-93; cf. 388-94). 

By contrast to elementary schools, research universities can 
support only a few students at public expense. The community’s 
interest here is not to help particular students, but to advance civil- 
isation. Even so, the recipients of aid have opportunities that are 
not available to others; and as a result of their superior education, 
they are likely to enjoy greater wealth and social esteem. Are these 
state-fostered inequalities justifiable? Here, as in earlier chapters 
of The Constitution of Liberty, Hayek opposes efforts to equalise 
opportunities, arguing that the public’s interest is best served by 
allowing individuals to make full use of the opportunities available 


178 


SAFEGUARDING PROGRESS 


to them, even though these opportunities are limited to a few and 
inequality is the inevitable outcome (382, 385-6). 

Political philosophers traditionally have taught that each 
political regime aims to produce the type of citizen that accords 
with that regime; and Hayek agrees that this has been the case. 
He insists, however, that moulding citizens of a particular type is 
not the proper business of government. To do so is to presume 
to know what type of human being the future will prefer; but we 
cannot know how the future will assess man’s moral and aesthetic 
qualities. The solution is to encourage a variety of types. Freedom 
means that ‘no superior must be allowed to enforce one set of 
views of what is right or good’ and that ‘only further experience 
can decide what should prevail.’ Each generation must endeavour 
to add its share ‘in the growth of knowledge and the gradual 
advance of moral and aesthetic beliefs’ (394; cf. 380). 

Hayek cautions against expecting too much from general 
enlightenment. Rationalist liberalism set out to ‘conquer ignor- 
ance,’ but Hayek doubts that such a goal is feasible or that society 
can be improved this way: ‘There is not much reason to believe 
that, if at any one time the best knowledge which some possess 
were made available to all, the result would be a much better 
society’ (376-80). 

Education, properly understood, views man as a being in 
progress or as one who ‘reaches beyond his present self.’ Educa- 
tion thus goes hand in hand with human freedom, whose ultimate 
aim ‘is the enlargement of those capacities in which man surpasses 
his ancestors.’ Freedom does have a purpose or aim, although its 
consequences are unforeseeable. Hayek concludes in this vein by 
quoting a well-known passage from Humboldt to the effect that 
liberty’s overriding aim is ‘human development in its richest 


179 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


diversity’ (394). Education is vital to human development, thus 
understood. This is why a free society’s education policy cannot 
be merely utilitarian. 


180 


1 5 WHY I AM NOT A CONSERVATIVE 
(POSTSCRIPT) 


When Hayek, in the body of his text, attacks rival views, his 
targets are mainly rationalist liberalism and socialism in one 
form or another. To be sure, he sometimes criticises conserva- 
tive thought and practice; but given his insistence on the limits 
of reason, the force of tradition and the need to recover old prin- 
ciples, the reader might well conclude that the term ‘conserva- 
tive’ applies aptly to Hayek. This notion is exploded by Hayek’s 
Postscript, which repudiates conservatism in no uncertain terms. 
The Postscript summarises some leading points made in the 
body of the work, so framed as to highlight Hayek’s fundamental 
disagreement with conservatism. Yet if the Postscript were merely 
a summary, it would not have become - as it has become - the 
most widely read and discussed part of The Constitution of Liberty. 
By framing the Postscript as a hard-nosed critique of conserva- 
tism, Hayek guaranteed that it would be controversial and would 
gain a wide audience. 

Why did Hayek wish to distance himself from conservatism? 
By his account, the Conservative Party of Britain and their equiva- 
lents in European nations had long resisted free market ideas 
and favoured expansive government, especially one that would 
maintain established privileges. The conservative parties, rather 
than resisting the collectivist tide, had accommodated it: ‘It has 
been regularly the conservatives who have compromised with 


181 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


socialism and stolen its thunder’ (398-9). Hayek thus perceived 
‘true conservatism’ to be liberty’s adversary rather than its ally. As 
a defender of liberty, he wanted to draw an indelible line between 
his position and that of the conservatives. 

In the USA there was neither a long-standing conservative 
party nor a major socialist party. Americans who cherished the 
original Constitution were not conservatives in Hayek’s sense, 
because they appealed finally to the ideal of liberty that the Consti- 
tution embodies. The term ‘conservative’ came into wide use in 
the USA after World War II to indicate opposition to ‘liberalism,’ 
which in the American context meant chiefly the statist principles 
and policies of Franklin D. Roosevelt’s New Deal. A burgeoning 
conservative movement emerged in the 1950s, drawing inspira- 
tion from diverse thinkers and writers who in one way or another 
defended individual freedom and limited government. This 
movement was an uneasy coalition of ‘traditionalists’ and ‘liber- 
tarians,’ or of humanists who worried about moral or religious 
decline and proponents of free market economics who wished to 
curb government’s power. Hayek’s writings greatly influenced the 
latter group, and he came to be classified as a libertarian conserva- 
tive. Hayek did not wish to be identified as a conservative, even in 
this loose American sense, or as a libertarian. 

In the body of the Postscript, Hayek raises specific objections 
to historical conservatism and shows how it differs from true 
liberalism. Conservatism lacks principles or goals of its own and 
thus is unable to offer an alternative to current developments; it 
seeks to prevent or limit innovation, since it fears change and the 
impact of new ideas; it is fond of authority and willingly uses it to 
make individuals conform to acceptable values, goals and moral 
and religious beliefs; it invokes ‘the authority of supernatural 


182 


WHY I AM NOT A CONSERVATIVE 


sources of knowledge’ when reason fails (406); it assigns special 
privileges to persons whom authority recognises as superior and 
uses the state to preserve social hierarchy; it distrusts democracy 
and blames it for present evils; it lacks sufficient knowledge of 
economics to see that spontaneous forces of adjustment can be 
counted on to produce beneficial order and growth in the future 
as they have in the past; and it is stridently nationalistic, even 
to the point of endorsing imperialistic missions to civilise other 
peoples. 

True liberalism, by contrast, is guided by principles and 
by a theory of social order; it welcomes change and the genera- 
tion of new ideas; it invests authority in the law and, because 
power corrupts, favours the Rule of Law over the rule of men; 
it is tolerant of moral and cultural diversity and thus makes it 
possible for persons with different values to coexist peacefully; 
it acknowledges our inescapable ignorance and avoids explana- 
tions that invoke the supernatural; it denies that anyone can 
say, absent competition, who the superior persons are, and also 
rejects the notion that such persons should live by different rules, 
be guaranteed a special position in society, or be sheltered from 
forces of economic change; it regards democracy as the least evil 
(and therefore the best practicable) form of government; it is 
willing to let the market work, since it assumes that in economic 
matters particularly, ‘the self-regulating forces of the market will 
somehow bring about the required adjustments to new condi- 
tions’ (400); and its outlook is cosmopolitan rather than nation- 
alistic (399-407). 

Hayek identifies himself with what he calls ‘the party of 
liberty’ or ‘the party of life.’ The party of liberty goes back to the 
eighteenth century, and it does not coincide with any political 


183 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


party or partisan coalition of Hayek’s day. Its aim is to promote 
freedom by influencing opinion, and this it does mainly by 
formulating ideas that will govern society in the long run. Hayek 
had worked tirelessly in the 1940s and 1950s for the rebirth of a 
liberal movement in Europe. In appealing to like-minded scholars, 
he advised them to stand for ‘the highest ideals and keep free 
from the political disputes of the day.’ Devotion to liberal ideals 
should protect them from the risk ‘of becoming involved in party 
passions.’ 

The party of liberty was the only kind of party that Hayek, 
as a political philosopher, could embrace. The political philoso- 
pher seeks to shape opinion by defending general principles in an 
uncompromising way. Party leaders, by contrast, ‘organize people 
for action’ - a task that requires them to downplay differences of 
principle among their followers and to aim for what seems polit- 
ically possible at the moment (411). The politician lets sleeping 
dogs lie; the political philosopher stirs controversy. The politician 
seeks short-term results; the political philosopher understands 
that far-reaching alterations in institutions or policies are possible 
only through a change in public opinion. By taking the long view 
in the 1950s and 1960s and sticking mainly to the philosopher’s 
task of stating or clarifying basic principles, Hayek and like- 
minded persons would contribute decisively to key developments 
in the 1970s - the transformation of British conservatism into the 
party of free enterprise and the ascendancy of a market-oriented 
conservative movement in the USA. 

Hayek is perplexed as to what to call ‘the party of liberty.’ He 
has ruled out the name ‘conservative.’ ‘Liberal’ is accurate histor- 
ically, but the term no longer means what it did in England at the 
turn of the nineteenth century, and its US meaning is the opposite 


184 


WHY I AM NOT A CONSERVATIVE 


of its true meaning. ‘Libertarian’ is ‘singularly unattractive’ to 
Hayek and for his taste ‘carries too much the flavor of a manu- 
factured term and of a substitute’ (407-8). Hayek leaves open the 
question of whether he objects to libertarian thinking as well as 
to the term itself. This reticence did not deter Hayek’s libertarian 
critics from attacking The Constitution of Liberty, both for inad- 
equately limiting state coercion and for condoning expansive 
government services. 

Hayek has racked his brain unsuccessfully to find ‘a word 
which describes the party of life, the party that favors free growth 
and spontaneous evolution’ (408). Taking a cue from the English 
Whigs, whose ideals inspired liberal movements in the whole of 
Europe and in the American colonies, he finally concludes that 
‘Whiggism is historically the correct name for the ideas in which 
I believe.’ By the mid-nineteenth century, Whig parties in both 
Britain and the USA had been discredited. Nevertheless, Hayek’s 
studies in the evolution of ideas have made him increasingly aware 
‘that I am simply an unrepentant Old Whig - with the stress on 
the “old.”’ Whiggism ‘has been the name for the only set of ideals 
that has consistently opposed all arbitrary power.’ Hayek does not 
know if reviving this name ‘is practical politics,’ but this is not his 
main concern as a political philosopher. The ‘party of liberty’ or 
‘party of life’ that he wants to revive is a broad movement of ideas 
that may, in the long term, affect political affairs. Making it into 
a political party would give it an altogether different character 
(408-10). 


185 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Works of F. A. Hayek 

1937 ‘Economics and knowledge’, Economica, IV (new ser., 1937), 
33-54. Reprinted in Hayek (1948: 33-56). 

1941 [2007a] The Pure Theory of Capital. Collected Works, vol. 12, 
ed. Lawrence H. White, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago 
Press. 

1944a ‘Historians and the future of Europe’. Reprinted in Hayek 
(1992: 201-15). 

1944b [2007b] The Road to Serfdom. Collected Works, vol. 2, 
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 

1948 Individualism and Economic Order, Chicago, IL: University of 
Chicago Press. 

1952a The Sensory Order, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 
1952b [1979] The Counter-Revolution of Science, Glencoe, IL: Lree 
Press. Second edn: Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Lund. 

1954 Capitalism and the Historians, ed. with Introduction (pp. 
3-29) by Hayek, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 

1955 The Political Ideal of the Rule of Law, Cairo: Bank of Egypt. 
i960 The Constitution of Liberty, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago 

Press. 


186 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1964 ‘Kinds of order in society’, New Individualist Review, 3(2) 
(Winter): 3-12. Reprinted in Hayek (1967). Available at the 
Online Library of Liberty. 

1967 Studies in Philosophy, Politics, and Economics, Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press. 

1973 Rules and Order, vol. 1 of Law, Legislation and Liberty, 

Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 

1976 The Mirage of Social Justice, vol. 2 oiLaw, Legislation and 
Liberty, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 

1978a New Studies in Philosophy, Politics, Economics, and the History 
of Ideas, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 

1978b [2009] Denationalisation of Money, London: Institute of 
Economic Affairs. Reprinted in Hayek (2009: 138-229). 

1979 The Political Order of a Free People, vol. 3 of Law, Legislation 
and Liberty, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 

1988 The Fatal Conceit: The Errors of Socialism, ed. W. W. Bartley 
III, vol. 1 of Collected Works, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago 
Press. 

1992 The Fortunes of Liberalism, ed. Peter G. Klein, vol. 4 of 
Collected Works, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press and 
Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Lund. 

1994 Hayek on Hayek: An Autobiographical Dialogue, ed. Stephen 
Kresge and Leif Wenar, supplement to Collected Works, 
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press and Indianapolis, IN: 
Liberty Lund. 

2009 Good Money, Part II, ed. Stephen Kresge, vol. 6 of Collected 
Works, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press and 
Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Lund. 


187 


hayek’s the constitution of liberty 


Other works 

Locke, John (1690 [1988]) The Second Treatise of Government, in 
Peter Laslett (ed.), Two Treatises of Government, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Mill, John Stuart (1975) On Liberty, ed. David Spitz, New York: W. 
W. Norton. 

Miller, Eugene F. (1972) ‘The cognitive basis of Hayek’s political 
thought’, in Robert L. Cunningham (ed.), Liberty and the Rule 
of Law, College Station, TX: Texas A&M University Press. 
Nietzsche, Friedrich (1954) Thus Spoke Zarathustra, trans. Walter 
Kaufmann, in W. Kaufmann (ed.), The Portable Nietzsche, New 
York: Viking. 

Rousseau, Jean-Jacques (1978) On the Social Contract, ed. Roger D. 
Masters and trans. Judith R. Masters, New York: St Martin’s 
Press. 

Schumpeter, Joseph A. (1950) Capitalism, Socialism and 
Democracy, New York: Harper & Row. 

Tocqueville, Alexis de (2000) Democracy in America, trans. and 
ed. Harvey C. Mansfield and Delba Winthrop, Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press. 

Weber, Max (1949) The Methodology of the Social Sciences, ed. 

Edward A. Shils, Glencoe, IL: Free Press. 

Weber, Max (2004) ‘Science as a vocation’, in David Owen and 
Tracy B. Strong (eds), The Vocation Lectures, Hackett. 


188 


ABOUT THE IEA 


The Institute is a research and educational charity (No. CC 235 351), limited 
by guarantee. Its mission is to improve understanding of the fundamental 
institutions of a free society by analysing and expounding the role of markets in 
solving economic and social problems. 

The IEA achieves its mission by: 

• a high-quality publishing programme 

• conferences, seminars, lectures and other events 

• outreach to school and college students 

• brokering media introductions and appearances 

The IEA, which was established in 1955 by the late Sir Antony Fisher, is 
an educational charity, not a political organisation. It is independent of any 
political party or group and does not carry on activities intended to affect 
support for any political party or candidate in any election or referendum, or 
at any other time. It is financed by sales of publications, conference fees and 
voluntary donations. 

In addition to its main series of publications the IEA also publishes a 
quarterly journal, Economic Affairs. 

The IEA is aided in its work by a distinguished international Academic 
Advisory Council and an eminent panel of Honorary Fellows. Together with 
other academics, they review prospective IEA publications, their comments 
being passed on anonymously to authors. All IEA papers are therefore subject to 
the same rigorous independent refereeing process as used by leading academic 
journals. 

IEA publications enjoy widespread classroom use and course adoptions 
in schools and universities. They are also sold throughout the world and often 
translated/reprinted. 

Since 1974 the IEA has helped to create a worldwide network of 100 
similar institutions in over 70 countries. They are all independent but share the 
lEA's mission. 

Views expressed in the lEA's publications are those of the authors, not 
those of the Institute (which has no corporate view), its Managing Trustees, 
Academic Advisory Council members or senior staff. 

Members of the Institute's Academic Advisory Council, Honorary Fellows, 
Trustees and Staff are listed on the following page. 


190 


The Institute gratefully acknowledges financial support for its publications 
programme and other work from a generous benefaction by the late Alec and 
Beryl Warren. 


lea 


The Institute of Economic Affairs 

2 Lord North Street, Westminster, London SW1 P 3LB 

Tel: 020 7799 8900 

Fax: 020 7799 21 37 

Email: iea@iea.org.uk 

Internet: iea.org.uk 


Director General & Ralph Harris Fellow Mark Littlewood 


Editorial Director 

Professor Philip Booth 

Managing Trustees 

Chairman: Professor D R Myddelton 


Kevin Bell 

Professor Patrick M inford 

Robert Boyd 

Dr Mark Pennington 

Michael Fisher 

Neil Record 

Michael Hintze 

Professor Martin Ricketts 

Malcolm McAlpine 

Linda Whetstone 

Academic Advisory Council 


Chairman: Professor Martin Ricketts 


Graham Bannock 

Dr Eileen Marshall 

Dr Roger Bate 

Professor Antonio Martino 

Professor Alberto Benegas-Lynch, Jr 

Dr John Meadowcroft 

Professor Donald J Boudreaux 

Dr Anja Merz 

Professor John Burton 

Professor Julian Morris 

Professor Forrest Capie 

Professor Alan Morrison 

Professor Steven N S Cheung 

Paul Ormerod 

Professor Tim Congdon 

Professor David Parker 

Professor N F R Crafts 

Professor Victoria Curzon Price 

Professor David de Meza 

Professor Colin Robinson 

Professor Kevin Dowd 

Professor Charles K Rowley 

Professor Richard A Epstein 

Professor Pascal Salin 

Nigel Essex 

Dr Razeen Sally 

Professor David Greenaway 

Professor Pedro Schwartz 

Dr Ingrid A Gregg 

Professor J R Shackleton 

Walter E Grinder 

Jane S Shaw 

Professor Steve H Hanke 

Professor W Stanley Siebert 

Professor Keith Hartley 

Dr Elaine Sternberg 

Professor David Henderson 

Professor James Tooley 

Professor Peter M Jackson 

Professor Nicola Tynan 

Dr Jerry Jordan 

Professor Roland Vaubel 

Dr Lynne Kiesling 

Dr Cento Veljanovski 

Professor Daniel B Klein 

Professor Lawrence H White 

Professor Chandran Kukathas 

Professor Walter E Williams 

Professor Stephen C Littlechild 

Professor Geoffrey E Wood 

Honorary Fellows 


Professor Armen A Alchian 

Professor Sir Alan Peacock 

Professor Michael Beenstock 

Professor Ben Roberts 

Sir Samuel Brittan 

Professor Anna J Schwartz 

Professor James M Buchanan 

Professor Vernon L Smith 

Professor Ronald H Coase 

Professor Gordon Tullock 

Professor David Laidler 

Professor Basil S Yamey 

Professor Chiaki Nishiyama 



191 


Other papers recently published by the IEA include: 

A Market in Airport Slots 

Keith Boyfield (editor), David Starkie, Tom Bass & Barry Humphreys 
Readings 56; ISBN o 255 36505 5; £10.00 

Money. Inflation and the Constitutional Position of the 

Central Bank 

Milton Friedman & Charles A. E. Goodhart 
Readings 57; ISBN o 255 36538 1; £10.00 

railway.com 

Parallels between the Early British Railways and the ICT Revolution 
Robert C. B. Miller 

Research Monograph 57; ISBN o 255 36534 9; £12.50 

The Regulation of Financial Markets 

Edited by Philip Booth & David Currie 
Readings 58; ISBN o 255 36551 9; £12.50 

Climate Alarmism Reconsidered 

Robert L. Bradley Jr 

Hobart Paper 146; ISBN o 255 36541 1; £12.50 

Government Failure: E. C. West on Education 

Edited by James Tooley & James Stanfield 
Occasional Paper 130; ISBN o 255 36552 7; £12.50 

Corporate Governance: Accountability in the Marketplace 

Elaine Sternberg 
Second edition 

Hobart Paper 147; ISBN o 255 36542 x; £12.50 

The Land Use Planning System 

Evaluating Options for Reform 
John Corkindale 

Hobart Paper 148; ISBN o 255 36550 o; £10.00 


Economy and Virtue 

Essays on the Theme of Markets and Morality 

Edited by Dennis O’Keeffe 

Readings 59; ISBN o 255 36504 7; £12.50 

Free Markets Under Siege 

Cartels, Politics and Social Welfare 
Richard A. Epstein 

Occasional Paper 132; ISBN o 255 36553 5; £10.00 

Unshackling Accountants 

D. R. Myddelton 

Hobart Paper 149; ISBN o 255 36559 4; £12.50 

The Euro as Politics 

Pedro Schwartz 

Research Monograph 58; ISBN o 255 36535 7; £12.50 

Pricing Our Roads 

Vision and Reality 

Stephen Glaister & Daniel J. Graham 

Research Monograph 59; ISBN o 255 36562 4; £10.00 

The Role of Business in the Modern World 

Progress, Pressures, and Prospects for the Market Economy 
David Henderson 

Hobart Paper 150; ISBN o 255 36548 9; £12.50 

Public Service Broadcasting Without the BBC? 

Alan Peacock 

Occasional Paper 133; ISBN o 255 36565 9; £10.00 

The ECB and the Euro: the First Five Years 

Otmar Issing 

Occasional Paper 134; ISBN o 255 36555 1; £10.00 


Towards a Liberal Utopia? 

Edited by Philip Booth 

Hobart Paperback 32; ISBN o 255 36563 2; £15.00 

The Way Out of the Pensions Quagmire 

Philip Booth & Deborah Cooper 

Research Monograph 60; ISBN o 255 36517 9; £12.50 

Black Wednesday 

A Re-examination of Britain 's Experience in the Exchange Rate Mechanism 
Alan Budd 

Occasional Paper 135; ISBN o 255 36566 7; £7.50 

Crime: Economic Incentives and Social Networks 

Paul Ormerod 

Hobart Paper 151; ISBN o 255 36554 3; £10.00 

The Road to Serfdom with The Intellectuals and Socialism 

Friedrich A. Hayek 

Occasional Paper 136; ISBN o 255 36576 4; £10.00 

Money and Asset Prices in Boom and Bust 

Tim Congdon 

Hobart Paper 152; ISBN o 255 36570 5; £10.00 

The Dangers of Bus Re-regulation 

and Other Perspectives on Markets in Transport 
John Hibbs et al. 

Occasional Paper 137; ISBN o 255 36572 1; £10.00 

The New Rural Economy 

Change, Dynamism and Government Policy 
Berkeley Hill et al. 

Occasional Paper 138; ISBN o 255 36546 2; £15.00 

The Benefits of Tax Competition 

Richard leather 

Hobart Paper 153; ISBN o 255 36569 1; £12.50 


Wheels of Fortune 


Self -funding Infrastructure and the Free Market Case for a Land 
Fred Harrison 

Hobart Paper 154; ISBN o 255 36589 6; £12.50 

Were 364 Economists All Wrong? 

Edited by Philip Booth 

Readings 60; ISBN 978 o 255 36588 8; £10.00 

Europe After the 'No' Votes 

Mapping a New Economic Path 
Patrick A. Messerlin 

Occasional Paper 139; ISBN 978 o 255 36580 2; £10.00 

The Railways, the Market and the Government 

John Hibbs et al. 

Readings 61; ISBN 978 o 255 36567 3; £12.50 

Corruption: The World's Big C 

Cases, Causes, Consequences, Cures 
Ian Senior 

Research Monograph 61; ISBN 978 o 255 36571 o; £12.50 

Choice and the End of Social Housing 

Peter King 

Hobart Paper 155; ISBN 978 o 255 36568 o; £10.00 

Sir Humphrey's Legacy 

Facing Up to the Cost of Public Sector Pensions 
Neil Record 

Hobart Paper 156; ISBN 978 o 255 36578 9; £10.00 

The Economics of Law 

Cento Veljanovski 
Second edition 

Hobart Paper 157; ISBN 978 o 255 36561 1; £12.50 


Living with Leviathan 

Public Spending, Taxes and Economic Performance 
David B. Smith 

Hobart Paper 158; ISBN 978 o 255 36579 6; £12.50 

The Vote Motive 

Gordon Tullock 
New edition 

Hobart Paperback 33; ISBN 978 o 255 36577 2; £10.00 

Waging the War of Ideas 

John Blundell 
Third edition 

Occasional Paper 131; ISBN 978 o 255 36606 9; £12.50 

The War Between the State and the Family 

How Government Divides and Impoverishes 
Patricia Morgan 

Hobart Paper 159; ISBN 978 o 255 36596 3; £10.00 

Capitalism - A Condensed Version 

Arthur Seldon 

Occasional Paper 140; ISBN 978 o 255 36598 7; £7.50 

Catholic Social Teaching and the Market Economy 

Edited by Philip Booth 

Hobart Paperback 34; ISBN 978 o 255 36581 9; £15.00 

Adam Smith - A Primer 

Eamonn Butler 

Occasional Paper 141; ISBN 978 o 255 36608 3; £7.50 

Happiness. Economics and Public Policy 

Helen Johns & Paul Ormerod 

Research Monograph 62; ISBN 978 o 255 36600 7; £10.00 


They Meant Well 

Government Project Disasters 
D. R. Myddelton 

Hobart Paper 160; ISBN 978 o 255 36601 4; £12.50 

Rescuing Social Capital from Social Democracy 

John Meadowcroft & Mark Pennington 
Hobart Paper 161; ISBN 978 o 255 36592 5; £10.00 

Paths to Property 

Approaches to Institutional Change in International Development 

Karol Boudreaux & Paul Dragos Aligica 

Hobart Paper 162; ISBN 978 o 255 36582 6; £10.00 

Prohibitions 

Edited by John Meadowcroft 

Hobart Paperback 35; ISBN 978 o 255 36585 7; £15.00 

Trade Policy. New Century 

The WTO, FT As and Asia Rising 
Razeen Sally 

Hobart Paper 163; ISBN 978 o 255 36544 4; £12.50 

Sixty Years On - Who Cares for the NHS? 

Helen Evans 

Research Monograph 63; ISBN 978 o 255 36611 3; £10.00 

Taming Leviathan 

Waging the War of Ideas Around the World 
Edited by Colleen Dyble 

Occasional Paper 142; ISBN 978 o 255 36607 6; £12.50 

The Legal Foundations of Free Markets 

Edited by Stephen F. Copp 

Hobart Paperback 36; ISBN 978 o 255 36591 8; £15.00 


Climate Change Policy: Challenging the Activists 

Edited by Colin Robinson 

Readings 62; ISBN 978 o 255 36595 6; £10.00 

Should We Mind the Cap? 

Gender Pay Differentials and Public Policy 
J. R. Shackleton 

Hobart Paper 164; ISBN 978 o 255 36604 5; £10.00 

Pension Provision: Government Failure Around the World 

Edited by Philip Booth et al. 

Readings 63; ISBN 978 o 255 36602 1; £15.00 

New Europe's Old Regions 

Piotr Zientara 

Hobart Paper 165; ISBN 978 o 255 36617 5; £12.50 

Central Banking in a Free Society 

Tim Congdon 

Hobart Paper 166; ISBN 978 o 255 36623 6; £12.50 

Verdict on the Crash: Causes and Policy Implications 

Edited by Philip Booth 

Hobart Paperback 37; ISBN 978 o 255 36635 9; £12.50 

The European Institutions as an Interest Croup 

The Dynamics ofEver-Closer Union 
Roland Vaubel 

Hobart Paper 167; ISBN 978 o 255 36634 2; £10.00 

An Adult A p proach to Education 

Alison Wolf 

Hobart Paper 168; ISBN 978 o 255 36586 4; £10.00 

Taxation and Red Tape 

The Cost to British Business of Complying with the UK Tax System 
Francis Chittenden, Hilary Foster & Brian Sloan 
Research Monograph 64; ISBN 978 o 255 36612 o; £12.50 


Ludwig von Mises - A Primer 

Eamonn Butler 

Occasional Paper 143; ISBN 978 o 255 36629 8; £7.50 

Does Britain Need a Financial Regulator? 

Statutory Regulation, Private Regulation and Financial Markets 

Terry Arthur & Philip Booth 

Hobart Paper 169; ISBN 978 o 255 36593 2; £12.50 


Other IEA publications 

Comprehensive information on other publications and the wider work 
of the IEA can be found at www.iea.org.uk . To order any publication 
please see below. 

Personal customers 

Orders from personal customers should be directed to the IEA: 

Sam Collins 
IEA 

2 Lord North Street 

FREEPOST LONIOI68 

London swip 3YZ 

Tel: 020 7799 8907. Fax: 020 7799 2137 
Email: scollins@iea.org.uk 

Trade customers 

All orders from the book trade should be directed to the IEA’s 
distributor: 

Gazelle Book Services Ltd (IEA Orders) 

FREEPOST RLYS-EAHU-YSCZ 

White Cross Mills 

Hightown 

Lancaster lai 4XS 

Tel: 01524 68765. Fax: 01524 53232 

Email: sales@gazellebooks.co.uk 

IEA subscriptions 

The IEA also olfers a subscription service to its publications. For a single 

annual payment (currently £42.00 in the UK), subscribers receive every 

monograph the IEA publishes. For more information please contact: 

Sam Collins 

Subscriptions 

IEA 

2 Lord North Street 

FREEPOST LONIOI68 

London swip 3YZ 

Tel: 020 7799 8907. Fax: 020 7799 2137 
Email: scollins@iea.org.uk 


