[Crimethinc]-[A-Civilians-Guide-to-Direct-Action].txt

Direct action has a rich heritage here 
in North America, extending back to the 
Boston Tea Party and beyond. Despite 
this, there are many misunderstandings 
about it, in part due to the ways it has been 
misrepresented in the corporate media. 



COMMON OBJECTIONS 
TO DIRECT ACTION 



Direct action is terrorism. 

Terrorism is calculated to intimidate and thus paralyze others. Nearly all direct action, 
on the other hand, is intended to inspire and thus motivate others by demonstrating the 
power people have to accomplish goals themselves. While terrorism is the domain of a 
specialized class that seeks pov^er for itself alone, direct action demonstrates tactics oth- 
ers can take up themselves, empov^ering people to take control of their ov^n lives. 

Direct action is violent. 

To say that it is violent to destroy the machinery of a slaughterhouse or to break 
v^indov^s belonging to a political party that promotes v^ar is to prioritize property over 
human and animal life. This objection subtly validates violence against living creatures 
by focusing all attention on property rights and av^ay from more fundamental issues. 
Direct action may obstruct the activities or destroy the property of a corporation or 
institution — but if the latter is itself involved in violent activity, then such an act is not 
violence but rather the prevention of violence. 

Over the past three decades of protests, civil disobedience, and sabotage, not a sin- 
gle person in the United States has been killed or seriously injured. Thousands, hov^ev- 
er, have been beaten, tear-gassed, and imprisoned. One need only reflect upon a nev^s 
report such as "Violence erupted when protesters began throwing tear gas canisters 
back at police" to discern who holds the monopoly on violence. 

Direct action is not political expression, 
but criminal activity. 

Unfortunately, whether or not an action is illegal is a poor measure of whether 
or not it is just. The Jim Crow laws were, after all, laws. To object to an action on the 
grounds that it is illegal is to sidestep the more important question of whether or not it 
is the right thing to do. To argue that we must always obey laws, even when we consider 
them to be unethical or to enforce unethical conditions, is to suggest that the arbitrary 
pronouncements of the legal establishment possess a higher moral authority than our 
own consciences, and to demand complicity in the face of injustice. When laws protect 
injustice, illegal activity is no vice, and law-abiding docility is no virtue. 

Direct action is unnecessary where 
people have freedom of speech. 

In a society dominated by an increasingly narrowly focused corporate media, it can 
be almost impossible to initiate a public dialogue on a subject unless something oc- 
curs that brings attention to it. Under such conditions, direct action can be a means of 
nurturing free speech, not squelching it. Likewise, when people who would otherwise 
oppose an injustice have accepted that it is inevitable, it is not enough simply to talk 
about it: one must demonstrate that it is possible to do something about it. 

Direct action is alienating. 

On the contrary, many people who find traditional party politics alienating are in- 
spired and motivated by direct action. Different people find different approaches fulfill- 
ing; a movement that is to be broad-based must include a wide range of options. 

Sometimes people who share the goals of those who practice direct action while 
objecting to their means spend all their energy decrying an action that has been carried 
out. In doing so, they snatch defeat from the jaws of victory: they would do better to 
seize the opportunity to focus all attention on the issues raised by the action. 

People who practice direct action 
should work through the established 
political channels instead. 

Many people who practice direct action also work within the system. A commitment to 
making use of every institutional means of solving problems does not necessarily preclude 
an equal commitment to picking up where such means leave off. If the established chan- 
nels were themselves sufficient to address injustices, one might surmise that people would 
never make the difficult decision to work outside of them at greater risk to themselves. 

Direct action is exclusive. 

Some forms of direct action are not easy for most people to engage in, but this does 
not necessarily mean they are irresponsible or ineffective. Everyone has different pref- 
erences and capabilities, and should be free to act according to them. The important 
question is how the differing approaches of individuals and groups that share the same 
long-term goals can be integrated in such a way that they complement each other. 

Anonymous direct action is cowardly. 

This accusation is almost always made by people who have the privilege of speak- 
ing and acting in public without fearing repercussions: that is to say, those who have 
power in this society, and those who obediently accept their power. Should the heroes 
of the French Resistance have demonstrated their courage and accountability by acting 
against the Nazi occupation in the full light of day, thus dooming themselves to defeat? 
For that matter, in a nation increasingly terrorized by police and federal surveillance 
of just about everyone, is it any wonder that those who express dissent might want to 
protect their privacy while doing so? 



Direct action is practiced only by 
privileged young people/uncivilized 
poor people/adventurist lunatics/etc. 

In fact, direct action is and long has been practiced in a variety of forms by peo- 
ple of all walks of life. The only possible exception to this would be members of the 
wealthiest and most powerful classes, who have no need to practice any kind of illegal 
or controversial action because, as if by coincidence, the established political channels 
are perfectly suited to their needs. 

Direct action is the work of agents 
provocateurs. 

This speculation is generally made from a distance, without concrete evidence. To 
allege that direct action must be the work of police agent provocateurs is disempower- 
ing: it rules out the possibility that activists could do such things themselves, overes- 
timating the powers of police intelligence and reinforcing the illusion that the State is 
omnipotent. Likewise, it preemptively dismisses the value of a diversity of tactics, and 
the reality that people are applying them. When people feel entitled to make unfounded 
claims that every tactic of which they disapprove is a police provocation, this obstructs 
the very possibility of constructive dialogue about which tactics are most effective. 

Direct action is dangerous and can 
have negative repercussions for others. 

Direct action can be dangerous in a repressive political climate, and it is impor- 
tant that those who practice it make every effort not to endanger others. This is not 
necessarily an objection to it, however — on the contrary, when it becomes dangerous 
to act outside established political channels, it becomes all the more important to do 
so. Authorities may use direct actions as excuses to terrorize innocents, as Hitler did 
when the Reichstag burned, but those in power are the ones who must answer for the 
injustices they commit in so doing, not those who oppose them. 

Likewise, though people who practice direct action may indeed run risks, in the face of an 
insufferable injustice it can be more dangerous and irresponsible to leave it uncontested. 

Direct action never accomplishes 
anything. 

Every effective political movement throughout history, from the struggle for the eight 
hour workday to the fight for women's suffiage, has used some form of direct action. 
Direct action can complement other forms of political activity in a variety of ways. If noth- 
ing else, it highlights the necessity for institutional reforms, giving those who push for 
them more bargaining chips; but it can go beyond this supporting role to suggest the pos- 
sibility of an entirely different organization of human life, in which power is distributed 
equally and all people have an equal and direct say in all matters that affect them. 





THE OPPOSITION 



For extensive information about specific direct 
action tactics, consult Ecodefense: A Field Guide 
to l\/lonl(eywrenchiing or Recipes for Disaster: An 
Anarchist Cookbooi^. You can obtain tlie latter book, as 
well as more copies of this primer, from: 

Crimethlnc. Agents Provocateurs 
P.O. Box 13998 
Salem OR 97309 




^^^^ 



Direct action, simply put, means cutting 
out the middleman — solving problems your- 
self rather than petitioning the authorities or 
relying on external institutions. Any action 
that sidesteps regulations and representation 
to accomplish goals directly is direct action. 

In a society in which political power, eco- 
nomic capital, and social control are central- 
ized in the hands of an elite, certain forms 
of direct action are discouraged, to say the 
least. These forms are of particular interest 
to those who struggle against hierarchy and 
oppression. 

There are countless scenarios in which you 
might want to use this kind of direct action. 
Perhaps representatives of despicable multi- 
national corporations are invading your town 
to hold a summit, and you want to participate 
in protests against them as more than just 
another body holding a sign; perhaps they've 
been there a long time, operating franchises 
that exploit workers and ravage the environ- 
ment, and you want to draw attention to or 
hinder their misdeeds; perhaps you want to 
organize a festive, community-oriented event 
such as a street party. Direct action can plant a 
public garden in an abandoned lot or defend it 
by paralyzing bulldozers; it can be used to oc- 
cupy empty buildings to house the homeless 
or to shut down government offices. Whether 
you're acting in secret with a trusted friend or 
in a mass action with thousands of others, the 
basic elements are the same. 



First of All . . . 



Brainstorming' 

Choose a project and devise a plan 

If it makes sense for your action to be organ- 
ized openly, establish a format, such as a public 
spokescouncil, in which to work out a strategy and 
tactics. Invite friends, or circulate fliers, or go door to 
door announcing it. Have a proposal in mind ahead 
of time, in case no one else does. 

For more clandestine actions, brainstorm in a 
secure environment with a trusted friend or two. 
Keep your ideas to yourselves as you hash them out 
so you won't have already given them away when 
you're ready to try them. 

Brainstorming can start with a problem you 
want to solve, or a social contribution you want 
to make; it can be informed by the resources you 
have, the kind of experience you desire, or the peo- 
ple you want to work with. You can plot a single 
short adventure, or a long-term campaign. Of- 
ten, the best brainstorming doesn't happen con- 
sciously, but in the course of daydreams and in- 
formal conversations — it's a good policy to trust 
that your craziest ideas can become reality and 
try them out. 

Even if you are attending a massive event organ- 
ized by others, always have a plan so you can contribute to 
it in your own way. 

Goals: 

Establish and prioritize the goals of the action 

who is your action "for"? Is it directed at on-the-spot 
spectators, corporate media viewers, the owners of spe- 
cific corporations, their stockholders, the police and gov- 
ernment, other members of the radical community, the 
participants themselves? 

What is it intended to accomplish? Is it meant to com- 
municate ideas, to call attention to an injustice, to inspire 
people, to secure resources, to set a particular tone, to in- 
flict crippling material damages, to provide a deterrent, to 



DIRECT ACTION IN A NUTSHELL: 
A STEP-BY-STEP GUIDE 



demonstrate a model others can apply, to be a learn- 
ing and bonding experience for those involved? 

Establishing the goals of the action from the out- 
set will save a lot of headaches later, when your plans 
shift and potential conflicts arise. 

Structure 

Affinity Group" 

Work tightly with those you know 

One of the most secure models for direct action 
organizing is the affinity group model. An affinity 
group is a group of friends who trust each other 
deeply and share the same goals; by working to- 
gether over a long period of time, they become 
efficient and effective. 
For a small action, the members of an affinity 
group can take on different roles. For a larger action, 
affinity groups can work with other affinity groups in a 
"cluster," each group playing a role. This can make de- 
cision-making easier than it would be in one big mass, 
as each group can send a representative to discussions. 
Clusters of affinity groups can work together over long 
periods, building trust and effectiveness. 



Bring in other individuals and groups carefully 

Once you have a plan to propose, figure out how many 
people you need to accomplish it. Invite only people you 
trust to keep secrets and that you are sure will want to 
join in — everyone you invite who doesn't end up partici- 
pating is a needless security risk. Extend invitations one 



by one, or affinity group by affinity group, so those who 
decide against participating will not know anything about 
the others involved; likewise, ask general questions at 
first, and don't reveal critical details of the plan such as 
exact target or date until a person is ready to make a com- 
mitment. As people are brought into a plan and go on to 
bring in others, make sure everyone has the same idea of 
how cautiously this should be done. 

As more people become involved in the project, it's 
also important that everyone understands how much 
commitment is called for. Sometimes the group that first 
presents a plan will be more invested in it than others; if 
they do months of work preparing, only to have another 
group they depended on drop out at the last minute, all 
that work is wasted. Everyone shares the responsibility of 
being honest from the beginning about what others can 
expect from them. At the same time, those who initiate 
a project should be careful to share ownership of it with 
everyone else involved. 



Make sure power is distributed evenly 
within your group 

Make all decisions in a participatory and consensual 
manner. If your group is large enough to warrant it, use 
an informal or formal consensus meeting process to make 
sure all voices are heard: set an agenda for each meeting, 
and pick a facilitator to keep meetings on track and an- 
other person to keep track of whose turn it is to speak. 
The better structured your process, the more likely it is 
that everyone will participate equally. 

Be aware of internal dynamics that may be unbalanced, 
such as those between people with different privilege, or 



between local organizers and participants 
from out of town. The more everyone par- 
ticipates in planning and preparing for the 
action, the more invested in its success 
everyone will be. A group with good in- 
ternal dynamics is smarter than any indi- 
vidual can be; together the group can work 
out the best way to apply the ideas brought 
in by individuals. 

Make sure everyone feels supported 
and comfortable throughout the project; 
check in with each other outside of formal 
structures as well as inside them. Main- 
taining morale is a critical, though often 
overlooked, aspect of successful direct ac- 
tion organizing — keep level heads in the 
face of surprises and uncertainty. 

The Basics 

Security Culture: 

Be intentional about how you share 
information 

Security culture is a way to avoid un- 
healthy paranoia by minimizing risks at 
all times. If you and your friends always 
conduct yourselves wisely, you'll have little 
to fear from infiltration and surveillance. 

The essence of security culture is that 
information is shared on a need-to-know 
basis. In some cases, the whole town will 
need to know about your action for it to be a 
success; in others, it will be crucial that the 
action is never spoken of outside the circle 
of those directly involved. Everyone privy to 
the action needs to share a sense of what 
security has been deemed appropriate, and 
to respect others' needs regarding safety. 

Consent is as important in security as it 
is in sexual intimacy; it is never acceptable 
to violate another's wishes about security 
issues. Make your own security needs ex- 
plicit from the beginning. 

It can be helpful for people working on 
a high security project to swear an oath of 
silence together. Never violate agreements 
about security, no matter how much time 
has passed since the action. When a group 
comes together to work on a project, make 
sure everyone present is vouched for by oth- 
ers in the group as reliable and trustworthy, 
and is willing to perjure themselves rather 
than send their comrades to jail. 

From the beginning of a project, you 
should operate according to the highest pos- 
sible level of security it might require; you 
can always lower the level of caution later, 
but if you start out being careless you close 
off a lot of options you might later miss. 

Be aware of all the ways your actions 
can be monitored or tracked: the records 
of surveillance cameras, the purchases 
and phone calls you make (both the num- 
bers you dial and the things you say), the 
fingerprints you leave (on the batteries in a 
flashlight as well as on the outside of it, for 
example), the places you go and the peo- 
ple with whom you are seen. Be especially 
careful about the location of meetings, the 



items you throw in your trash, and the files 
you have on your computer. Devise codes 
and prepare alibis as need be. 

Leoal Sunnort! 

Prepare an infrastructure to provide 
support during and after the action 

Everyone involved in the action should 
be aware of and prepared for the risks they 
are taking and the potential criminal charg- 
es associated with them. It's important not 
to take things further than you feel ready 
to go: if you get hurt or arrested or other- 
wise in trouble while engaging in a level 
of risk for which you are not emotionally 
prepared, the effects can be debilitating. Far 
better that you get started slowly, building a 
sustainable involvement with direct action 
projects that can continue over a lifetime, 
than rush into an action, have a bad experi- 
ence, and swear off all such activity. 

If your action may result in arrests, 
prepare a legal support structure for those 
who participate. This could include a le- 
gal aid number for arrestees to call, legal 
observers to monitor and document the 
actions of police, money for bail, lav^ers 
to provide immediate support to arrestees 
and to represent them in court, and a cir- 
cle of people prepared to offer emotional, 
financial, and logistical support through- 
out court cases. 

The legal aid number should be open to 
receive incoming calls at all times through- 
out the action; bear in mind that often you 
cannot call a cell phone from jail. It should 
not incriminate the arrestees or the people 
who receive the calls — if part of your alibi 
is that you don't know each other, don't 
all call the same number from jail. If you 
fear you will forget the number, write it on 
your body in permanent marker. The per- 
son operating the legal aid number should 
know the full names of those who may be 
arrested, so as to check on their status. 

To bail someone out of jail, you can ei- 
ther give the entire amount of the bail to the 
court system, in which case you will pre- 
sumably receive it back when the legal proc- 
ess is finally concluded, or you can go to a 
bail bondsman and pay io% of that; in the 
latter case, the bondsman's fees may cost 
you a significant amount of money. If no 
one can pay bail for someone, they may sit 
in jail until their court date, although in the 
case of minor infractions it can happen that 
police release people on their own recogni- 
zance so as not to have to deal with them. 

If you are risking arrest, decide wheth- 
er you want to have your identification on 
you to expedite processing, or you want to 
be without it, so they cannot identify you 
immediately. A group of arrestees who 
refuse to give their information can tie up 
the legal process and sometimes gain bar- 
gaining power. If you need any forms of 
medication, consider hiding them on your 
person, or carry a note from a doctor ex- 
plaining what you need. 



Find a sympathetic and trustworthy 
lawyer, or perhaps a few of them for large 
actions; a lawyer cannot represent more 
than one defendant on the same charges. 
You can research which lav^ers have 
taken on similar cases in the past, or ap- 
proach the American Civil Liberties Un- 
ion or National Lawyers Guild. If you don't 
give away anything sensitive, you can ask 
sympathetic lawyers about the charges as- 
sociated with hypothetical acts, or specify 
the dates and times you may require their 
services — but don't let them know any- 
thing that could implicate them: in order 
to do their job, they need to be able to 
prove that they are not connected to any- 
thing illegal. 

Any community whose members may 
suffer arrest would do well to establish 
a bail fund in advance; this can save a lot 
of running around in the middle of emer- 
gencies. Throw benefit shows, set aside 
infoshop profits, solicit donations from 
wealthy sympathizers, have your friends 
at the university book you speaking dates 
at their school in return for student funds; 
make sure the bail fund stays with someone 
who is even-handed, trustworthy, and al- 
ways easy to reach. Likewise, consider what 
your media strategy will be in different sce- 
narios — ^whether it will be wiser to attract a 
lot of attention and support to the case, or 
to try to keep it under the radar. 

Media: 

Establish what coverage 
you want and get it 

Long before an action, when you are 
establishing and prioritizing goals, work 
out exactly how much media coverage 
you want, from which sources, and how 
you are going to obtain or avoid it. This 
could mean composing and sending out a 
press release (Who, What, When, Where, 
How, Why) or a communique, electing a 
spokesperson to represent your project to 
the press, inviting corporate or independ- 
ent reporters to the action or to a press 
conference, faxing announcements or 
making press calls, offering interviews (in 
person or anonymously over the phone), 
or having members of your group cover 
documentation themselves. If you want 
to avoid certain kinds of coverage, it could 
also mean assigning a participant to make 
sure photographers do not aim their cam- 
eras at those involved. 

If you are communicating with the me- 
dia, compose "talking points," sound bites 
that your spokesperson repeats to be sure 
they get in the media coverage; give repre- 
sentatives of the press as little material to 
work with as possible, so you can control 
what they use. Watch which reporters tend 
to provide positive coverage, and approach 
them personally. Set up a webpage or use 
an existing website; if possible, get this ad- 
dress into corporate media coverage, to re- 
route their viewers or readers to your own 



media. You can also provide information 
to the public yourselves by postering, pi- 
rate radio, mailing out letters, or starting 
conversations door to door. 

If your action warrants high security, 
send your communique from a public 
computer that leaves no record of who 
uses it. Be aware of how the devices you 
use can incriminate you; for example, elec- 
tronic cameras imprint photos with cod- 
ing that can be used to identify the camera 
that took them. 

Groundwork 

Planning: 

Study the context, chart a strategy, 
plan for different scenarios 

Proper planning is the essence of safe, 
effective direct action. Keeping your goals 
and priorities in mind along with the re- 
sources you have to work with, plot and 
compare different strategies. Weigh out 
the risks and potential rewards of each: 
always pick the safest way to accomplish 
a given objective, and make sure you can 
afford to take the risks you choose. It often 
happens that as the planning process goes 
on, a project will get more and more ambi- 
tious and hazardous, until some of those 
involved start to have doubts; at this point, 
it may be necessary to work out a safer or 
scaled-down version of the plan, so it can 
still take place. 

There are countless factors to take into 
account in planning. You must pick the 
most effective tactics in the context of the 
current social and political situation. You 
must pick the best location for the action 
and take into account all its attributes; like- 
wise, you must pick the best date and time 
of day. You must bear in mind the others 
who will be in the area, and how they can 
be expected to react — will they be sympa- 
thetic, or will hostile vigilantes interfere 
with your activities? You must coordinate 
the timing of different parts of the action, 
predicting how long each will take, and 
figure out how those involved in the action 
will communicate. 

When predicting the responses of oth- 
ers — say, for example, the police — consider 
the factors influencing them: Are they ex- 
pecting what you're planning, or do you 
have the element of surprise.^ If you have 
the advantage of surprise, how long will it 
last? Will there be a lot of attention focused 
on the event? Will it be immediately appar- 
ent what you are doing? Will there be mid- 
dle-class citizens or reporters around, and 
will their presence put a damper on the au- 
thorities' response? What is their strategy 
likely to be? Do their bosses want them to 
come down hard on you, or to avoid provok- 
ing a scene? How well do they communi- 
cate, how fast do they move, where are they 
located and what routes will they take? 

Don't underestimate the challenges of 
simple logistical matters, such as trans- 






porting people or communicating in 
stressful situations. Don't forget to plan 
an exit strategy, either. 

Because plans rarely come off exactly as 
they are laid, it's important to have backup 
plans worked out for different scenarios: 

"If , we'll ; if , we'll ." Have 

a few different objectives in mind, in case 
your ideal one turns out to be impossible. 
Having a basic structure for communica- 
tions and decision-making in place will 
help you be prepared for situations that 
play out differently than any of the scenar- 
ios you had imagined. 

Be careful not to put some people at 
risk for others' actions; the authorities 
will probably charge whomever they get 
their hands on with the worst crimes they 
can, so it's important both to get those 
who take risks out of the area safely and 
to make sure serious charges can't stick to 
anyone else. In some cases, you can bring 
together multi-leveled groups in which 
everyone knows the general goal but only 
a few know critical details such as what the 
target is (until the last minute) or who is 
carrying out the riskiest activity. 

Be prepared for the best case scenario 
as well as the worst. New ideas, if they are 
good ones, tend to fail because people don't 
take them far enough, whereas older ideas 
usually fail because they are too familiar to 
everyone, including the authorities. Some- 
times the best results come from applying 
familiar tactics in entirely new settings. 

Look back in time for precedents, occa- 
sions when similar actions were attempted 
in similar contexts; these can be very instruc- 
tive. As you gather years of experience and 
learn from the successes and failures of oth- 
ers, you'll develop skills for predicting and 
preparing for a wide variety of situations. 

Prewarationw 

Gather equipment and 

dress appropriately 

Once your plans are laid, draw up a 
timeline until your action, counting back- 
wards from the big day to establish the 
deadlines for all the pieces that must be 
in place. 

Early on in the planning, work out what 
funding, materials, and other resources 
you will need and how to obtain them. If 
security is a priority, obtain what you need 
in such a way that it cannot be traced to 
you; affinity groups from out of town can 
acquire potentially incriminating materi- 
als far from the site of the action. 

Make sure everyone has appropriate 
clothes for the action, including different 
outfits in layers if necessary. Take security 
issues into account as they relate to cloth- 
ing: if everyone is dressing in black for 
anonymity, be sure no one's clothes have 
unique identifying features; likewise, if 
you're going to be posing as random pas- 
sers-by, remember that civilian dress is 
different in Miami than it is in Seattle. If 



/STOP 

BlOTECHNOl 



timing is important, make sure everyone's 
watches are synchronized. 

Double-check to make sure everything 
is ready by your deadline; go through a 
practice run, verbally if not physically. If 
participants are unfamiliar with the area, 
distribute maps. If need be, plant neces- 
sary materials in the area in advance of 
the action; be careful not to give anything 
away by doing so. 

Scouting: 

Study the site of the action and 
keep up with changes 

Before the action, study the area care- 
fully. Chart safe routes in and out; look for 
hiding places, obstacles, potential targets, 
and surveillance cameras (including those 
in ATMs and stoplights). Note how long it 
takes to travel key distances, and be aware 
of the visibility from and of key locations. 
How close are the authorities, how long will 
it take them to arrive? Can their approach 
be delayed? Who else is in the area? 

While scouting, be careful not to call 
attention to yourself or leave an obvious 
record of your passing. Be sure to do at 
least some of your scouting at the same 
time of day as the planned action, and if 
possible do a quick check immediately be- 
fore it to make sure nothing has changed. 
If your action calls for daunting tasks, 
such as climbing a steep rooftop, it may 
be good to make an actual practice run at 
some point. 

Information can also be gathered from 
photos, maps, and brochures; aerial maps 
may be available on the internet. In some 
cases you can obtain information from a 
tourist center, or call and ask questions on 
a pretext (as a student doing a report, for ex- 
ample), or even receive a guided tour. Once 
you've collected a lot of information, it can 
be helpful to consolidate the important parts 
into a map suited to your needs. Be careful 
to dispose of all your paperwork securely. 



Divide up responsibilities and set 
up decision-making structures 

Establish all the roles necessary to pull 
off your plan, and make sure every one of 
these is filled. Roles might include lookouts, 
scouts, police liaisons, media spokespeople, 
internal ("embedded") media, legal aid con- 
tacts, legal observers, medics, distractions, 
"plants" (for example, people disguised as 
innocent bystanders who are ready inter- 
vene if necessary, or who will politely honk 
their horns while a barricade is erected in 
front of them), getaway drivers, people to 
transport materials, people to receive in- 
formation and make tactical decisions, and 
people to carry out the actual action. 

In some situations, it is wise to have 
understudies for important roles, in case it 
turns out at the last minute that someone 
can't participate. This is especially true if you 



don't know in advance what the date of your 
action will be — for example, if it is to coincide 
with the beginning of a war not yet declared. 

Dinlomacv! 

Consider the way the action 
will affect others 

If your action is taking place during or 
as part of a larger event, there may be large 
meetings at which different groups try to 
coordinate their efforts; these can be useful, 
but they tend to consume a lot of time and 
energy, so make sure you go into them know- 
ing exactly what you hope to accomplish. 

Whether you're acting in the midst of 
thousands of other activists or far away from 
anyone, take into account the way your ac- 
tions will affect other people. Will your ac- 
tions endanger others? Will they provoke 
police repression? If so, will others bear the 
brunt of it, and is it possible to offset this? 
Will your actions make it more difficult for 
other people to do important work in a giv- 
en community? Are there negotiations or 
reassurances that should be made to others 
before, during, or after the action? 

Honor all agreements you make with 
other groups; some might be willing to 
help you, with or without knowledge of the 
specific details of what you're doing. Over 
time, if you prove reliable and considerate, 
you'll build alliances with them. 

During and After 
the Action 



stay alert throughout the action 

Awareness is key to the success of any 
action. Often, the atmosphere and the con- 
ditions that determine it can change very 
quickly. It is important to keep up with 
what is going on around you, and to have 
established in advance how you will react 
to a given scenario. For example, is the 
arrival of one police car a big deal? How 
about ten? Is it common for police to tail 
marchers in this city? While you can never 
be certain of exactly what will happen, go- 
ing over possible scenarios in advance and 
having an idea of how your group wants 
to deal with them will give everyone a more 
solid idea of how to react — and how not to 
overreact — as the situation develops. 

When informing others of a development, 
announce the raw information, not the conclu- 
sions you may have dravm from it ("The police 
are putting on gas masks," not "They're going 
to gas us!"), so others can draw their own con- 
clusions. Resist the urge to panic, and the ten- 
dency to get carried away as well. 

Keep each other informed 

During the action, scouts can keep 
track of changes in the terrain such as ar- 
riving police, crowd movements, others' 



activities nearby, and safe zones. They can 
use communication systems such as cell 
phones, text messaging, two-way radios, 
or whistles to keep in touch; audio or vis- 
ual signals such as car horns or fireworks 
can also be useful. A police scanner can be 
used to monitor police communications. 

To make communication more effi- 
cient, scouts can report to an individual or 
sub-group in the center of the action; in a 
larger setting, they can phone in their find- 
ings to a central information hub, which 
others can call with questions. 

Just as communications equipment 
can make you more efficient and effective, 
it also increases the risk of surveillance. 
You can use codes and code names, but 
be judicious — complicated codes are easy 
to forget, and prosecutors can argue that 
your codes meant something more dras- 
tic than they actually did. Even if no other 
communication system is used, it can be 
useful to have the option of an "abort" sig- 
nal for emergencies. 

Qisnersah 

Quit while you're ahead 

A safe escape is the most commonly 
overlooked part of direct action organizing. 
Be sure to have an exit strategy worked out 
in advance. If you'll be in a large group, es- 
pecially with others who haven't been part 
of the planning process, think about how to 
avoid the herd mentality that keeps crowds 
together after it would be better to split up. 
Know when to press your advantage, and 
when to quit — ^when to run as fast as you 
can, and when to walk nonchalantly. Dis- 
card anything that could incriminate you, if 
possible in a place it will not be found; wait 
to change your clothes until you're sure 
you're no longer under observation. 

If need be, gather in a safe place after- 
wards and make sure everyone is accounted 
for; collect bail money, seek outside assist- 
ance, write press releases. While everyone 
involved is still around, get contact informa- 
tion for anyone who might be able to testify 
or provide documentation to assist arrestees. 

^ n> Ik S iM #« ■ 

Regroup to discuss what went well 
and what lessons can be learned 

After the action, destroy any evidence 
that could be used against you; keep tools 
that could be tied to the action in a hiding 
place outside your home. Get together in a 
secure setting and go over what happened. 
Follow up on ongoing matters, such as 
supporting those with court cases, provid- 
ing further clarification to the public as to 
the goals of and ideas behind the action, 
and sorting out conflicts. Celebrate your 
victories, offer each other constructive 
criticism, learn from your mistakes, and 
lay plans for the next project. 





